The Project Gutenberg eBook of The eagle's wing, by B. M. Bower

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The eagle's wing
       A story of the Colorado

Author: B. M. Bower

Illustrator: Frank Tenney Johnson

Release Date: August 5, 2022 [eBook #68692]

Language: English

Produced by: Roger Frank and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images
             made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EAGLE'S WING ***





THE EAGLE’S WING

By B. M. Bower




Good Indian
Lonesome Land
The Ranch at the Wolverine
The Flying U’s Last Stand
The Heritage of the Sioux
Starr, of the Desert
Cabin Fever
Skyrider
Rim o’ The World
The Quirt
Cow-Country
Casey Ryan
The Trail of the White Mule
The Voice at Johnnywater
The Parowan Bonanza
The Eagle’s Wing




[Illustration: The man in the distance ducked out of sight amongst the
bowlders.]




THE EAGLE’S WING

A STORY OF THE COLORADO

BY B. M. BOWER

WITH FRONTISPIECE BY FRANK TENNEY JOHNSON

BOSTON

LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY

1924




Copyright, 1924,

By Little, Brown, and Company.

All rights reserved

Published February, 1924

Printed in the United States of America




To the American Eagle,
    fighting always the Vultures of the earth;
    whose protective wing extends even into the
    desert lands; whose shadow has fallen upon
    the great river, this story of the Colorado is
    loyally inscribed.
                                           B. M. B.




CONTENTS

    I. King, of the Mounted
    II. Johnny Buffalo Bears Another Message
    III. “My Heart is Dead”
    IV. Rawley Reads the Bible
    V. A City Forsaken
    VI. Trails Meet
    VII. Nevada
    VIII. “Him That is--Mine Enemy”
    IX. “A Pleasant Trip to You!”
    X. A Family Tree
    XI. Rawley Thinks Things Out
    XII. Rawley Plays the Game
    XIII. The Colorado
    XIV. The Vulture Screams
    XV. The Land of Splendid Dreams
    XVI. Rawley Investigates
    XVII. Changed Relations
    XVIII. The Johnny Buffalo Uprising
    XIX. The Eagle Strikes
    XX. Nevada Analyzes
    XXI. The Truth About Riches
    XXII. Greater Than Gold
    XXIII. The Eagle Looks Upon a Great River
    XXIV. Anita
    XXV. The Eagle and the Vulture
    XXVI. “Take This Fighting Squaw Away!”
    XXVII. “You Tell Hoover I Said So!”
    XXVIII. The Vulture Makes Terms with the Eagle
    XXIX. Fate Has Decreed
    XXX. Dawn and the River
    XXXI. The Vulture Feasts
    XXXII. Another Rescue
    XXXIII. The Eagle’s Wing




THE EAGLE’S WING


CHAPTER ONE

KING, OF THE MOUNTED


On the wide south porch of the house where he had been born, Rawley King sat
smoking his pipe in the dusk heavy with the scent of a thousand roses. The
fragrant serenity of the great, laurel-hedged yard of the King homestead was
charming after the hot, empty spaces of the desert. Even the somber west wing
of the brooding old house seemed wrapped in the peace that enfolds lives
moving gently through long, uneventful months and years. The smoke of his pipe
billowed lazily upward in the perfumed air; incense burned by the prodigal son
upon the home altar after his wanderings.

The old Indian, Johnny Buffalo, came walking straight as an arrow across the
strip of grass beside the syringa bushes that banked the west wing. Rawley
straightened and stared, the bowl of his pipe sagging to the palm of his hand.
As far back as he could remember, none had ever crossed that space of clipped
grass to hold speech with the Kings. But now Johnny Buffalo walked steadily
forward and halted beside the porch.

“Your grandfather say you come,” he announced calmly and turned back to the
somber west wing.

Sheer amazement held Rawley motionless for a moment. Until the Indian spoke to
him he had almost forgotten the strangeness of that hidden, remote life of his
grandfather. From the time he could toddle, Rawley had been taught that he
must not go near the west wing of the house or approach the brooding old man
in the wheel chair. As for the Indian who served his grandfather, Rawley had
been too much afraid of him to attempt any friendly overtures. There had been
vague hints that Grandfather King was not quite right in his mind; that a
brooding melancholy held him, and that he would suffer no one but his Indian
servant near him. Now, after nearly thirty years of studied aloofness, his
grandfather had summoned him.

The Indian was waiting in the shadowed west porch when Rawley tardily arrived
at the steps. He turned without speaking and opened the door, waiting for
Rawley to pass. Still dumb with astonishment, a bit awed, Rawley crossed the
threshold and for the first time in his life stood in the presence of his
grandfather.

A powerful figure the old man must have been in his youth. Old age had shrunk
him, had sagged his shoulders and dried the flesh upon his bones; but years
could not hide the breadth of those shoulders or change the length of those
arms. His eyes were piercingly blue and his lips were firm under the drooping
white mustache. His snow-white hair was heavy and lay upon his shoulders in
natural waves that made it seem heavier than it really was,--just so he had
probably worn it in the old, old days on the frontier. His eyebrows were
domineering and jet black, and the whole rugged countenance betrayed the
savage strength of the spirit that dwelt back of his eyes. But the great,
gaunt body stopped short at the knees, and the gray blanket smoothed over his
lap could not hide the tragic mutilation; nor could the great mustache conceal
the bitter lines around his mouth.

“Back from Arizona, hey?” he launched abruptly at Rawley, and his voice was
grim as his face.

Rawley started. Perhaps he expected a cracked, senile tone; it would have
fitted better the tradition of the old man’s mental weakness.

“Just got back to-day, Grandfather.” Instinctively Rawley swung to a
matter-of-fact manner, warding off his embarrassment over the amazing
interview.

“Mining expert, hey? Know your business?”

“Well enough to be paid for working at it,” grinned Rawley, trying
unsuccessfully to keep his eyes from straying curiously around the room filled
with ancient trophies of a soldier’s life half a century before.

“Not much like your father! I’ll bet he couldn’t have told you the meaning of
the words. Damned milksop. Bank clerk! Not a drop of King blood in his
body--far as looks and actions went. Guess he thought gold grew on bushes,
stamped with the date of the harvest!”

“I remember him vaguely. He never seemed well or strong,” Rawley defended his
dead father.

“Never had the King make-up. Only weakling the Kings ever produced--and he had
to be _my_ son! Take a look at that picture on the bureau. That’s what I mean
by King blood. Johnny, give him the picture.”

The Indian moved silently to a high chest of drawers against the farther wall
and lifted from it an enlarged, framed photograph, evidently copied from an
earlier crude effort of some pioneer in the art. He placed it reverently in
Rawley’s hands and retreated to a respectful distance.

“Taken before I started out with Moorehead’s expedition in ’59. Six feet two
in my bare feet, and not an ounce of soft flesh in my body. Not a man in the
company I couldn’t throw. Johnny could tell you.” A note of pride had crept
into the old man’s voice.

“I can see it, Grandfather. I--I’d give anything to have been with you in
those days. Lord, what a physique!”

The fierce old eyes sparkled. The bony fingers gripped the arms of the wheel
chair like steel claws.

“That’s the King blood. Give me two legs and I’d be a King yet, old as I
am--instead of a hunk of meat in a wheel chair.”

“It’s the spirit that counts, Grandfather,” Rawley observed hearteningly, his
eyes still on the picture but lifting now to the old man’s face. “The
picture’s like you yet.”

The old man grunted doubtfully, his eyes fixed sharply upon Rawley’s face. His
fingers drummed restlessly upon the arm of his chair, as if he were seeing in
the young man his own care-free youth, and was yearning over it in secret.
Indeed, as he stood there in the light of the old-fashioned lamp, Rawley King
might have been mistaken for the original of the picture with the costume set
fifty years ahead.

“Johnny, get the box.” Grandfather King spoke without taking his eyes off
Rawley.

The old Indian slipped away. In a moment he returned with a square metal box
which he placed on the old man’s knees. Rawley found himself wondering what
his mother would say when he told her that Grandfather King had sent for him,
was actually talking to him, giving him a glimpse of that sealed past of his.
He watched his grandfather fit a key into the lock of the metal box.

“You’re a King, thank God. I’ve watched you grow. Six feet and over, and no
water in _your_ blood, by the looks. You’re like I was at your age. Johnny
knows. He can remember how I looked when I had two legs. Here. You take
these--they’re yours, and all the good you can get out of them. Read ’em both.
Read ’em till you get the good that’s in ’em. If you’re a King, you’ll do it.”

He held out two worn little books. Rawley took them, eyeing them queerly. One
was a Bible, the old-fashioned, leather-bound pocket size edition, with a
metal clasp. The other book was smaller; a diary, evidently, with a leather
band going around, the end slipping under a flap to hold it secure.

“I will--you bet!” Rawley made his voice as hearty as his puzzlement would
permit. “Thanks, Grandfather.”

“I meant ’em for your father--but he wasn’t the man to get anything out of ’em
worth while. A milksop--wore spectacles before he wore pants! His idea of
success was to shove money out to other people through a grated window. Paugh!
When he told me that was his ambition, I came near burning the books. Johnny
could tell you. He stopped me--only time in his life he ever stuck his foot
through the wheel of my chair and anchored me out of reach of the fire. Out of
reach of my guns, too, or I’d have killed him maybe! Johnny said, ‘You wait.
Maybe more Kings come--like Grandfather.’

“So I did wait, and after a while I could watch you grow--all King. I could
tell by the set of your shoulders and the tone of your voice and the way you
went straight at anything you wanted. So there’s your legacy, boy, from King,
of the Mounted. Ask any of the old veterans who King, of the Mounted, was! You
read those books.” He lifted a bony finger and pointed. “There’s a lot in that
Bible--if you read it careful.”

“You bet, Grandfather!” Rawley undid the clasp and opened the book politely.
The old man twisted his lips into a sardonic smile. His eyes gleamed, indigo
blue, under his shaggy black brows. Then, as if reminded of something
forgotten, he dipped into the box, fumbled a bit and held out his hand to
Rawley.

“You’re a mining expert; maybe you can tell me where I picked them up.” His
eyes bored into Rawley’s face.

Rawley bent his head over the three nuggets of gold. He weighed them in his
hand, turned them to the light of the lamp which Johnny Buffalo had lifted
from the table and held close.

“Greenhorns think that gold is gold,” Rawley grinned at last. “And so it
is--but you left a little rock sticking to this one, Grandfather. So I’ll
guess Nevada.”

“Hunh!” The old man’s eyes sparkled. “What part?”

Rawley glanced up at him with the endearing King smile. “Say, I’m liable to
fall down on that! But I reckon King, of the Mounted, will put me flat against
the wall before he quits, anyway. So--well, how about Searchlight?”

“Hunh! I guess you know your job.” The old man smiled back at him, a glimmer
of that same endearing quality in the smile and the eyes. He waved back the
gold when Rawley would have returned it. “Keep it--you’ve earned it. No use to
me any more.” He settled deeper into the chair and gave a great sigh as his
head dropped back against the cushions. “Fifty years ago I picked ’em up--and
I’ve lived to see a King turn them over twice in his hand and tell me within a
few miles of where I got them. That shows what I mean by King blood. Fifty
years ago! It’s a long time to live like a hunk of meat. I’m seventy-nine--”

“Get out! You’d have to prove it, Grandfather. That’s a good ten years more
than you look.”

“Don’t lie to me, boy.” But King, of the Mounted, failed to look censorious.
“You read that Bible. Remember, that’s the legacy old King, of the Mounted,
leaves to the next King in line. It don’t lie, boy. Read it faithful and heed
what it says, and some day you’ll say the old man wasn’t so crazy after all.”

“Why, Grandfather,--”

But the old man waved him away with a peremptory gesture. Johnny Buffalo
glided to the door, opened it and held it so, waiting with the inscrutable
calm of his race.

“Well, good night, Grandfather. I’m--glad to have had this little talk. And I
hope it won’t be the last. I always wanted to pioneer, and I’ve always felt as
if I’d like to talk over those times--”

Rawley was finding it rather difficult even yet to bridge the silence of a
lifetime.

“You grew up thinking I was crazy, most likely. Easy to say the old man’s
touched in the head--when they don’t want to bother with a cripple. You’re a
King. Maybe you can guess what it means to be a hulk in a wheel chair. And the
Kings never ran after anybody; nor the Rawlinses, your grandmother’s people.
Two good names--glad you carry ’em both. If you live up to ’em both you’ll go
far. Take care of those two books, boy. Remember what I said--they’re your
legacy from King, of the Mounted. Good night.”

The old man snapped out the last two words in a tone of finality and reached
for his pipe. Johnny Buffalo opened the door an inch wider. Rawley obeyed the
unspoken hint and straightway found himself outside, with the door closed
behind him. He waited, listening, loth to go. Now that the feud was broken, he
tingled with the desire to know more about his grandfather, more about those
wonderful old fighting frontier days, more about King, of the Mounted.

“Crazy? I should say not!” Rawley muttered as he made his way slowly across
the strip of grass by the syringas. “I only hope my brain will be as keen as
Grandfather’s when I am his age.”

He stood for a few minutes breathing deep the night air saturated with
perfume. Then, with the spell of his grandfather’s vivid personality strong
upon him, he went in to where his mother sat gently rocking beside a
rose-shaded lamp, looking over a late magazine.

“I’ve just been having a talk with Grandfather,” Rawley announced bluntly,
sitting down opposite his mother and studying her as if she were a stranger to
him. Indeed, those few minutes spent in the west wing had dealt a sharp blow
to his unquestioning faith in his mother. Mrs. King dropped the magazine and
opened her lips--artificially red--and gave a faint gasp.

“Grandfather’s mind is as clear as yours or mine,” Rawley stated
challengingly. “A bit old-fashioned, maybe--a man couldn’t live in a wheel
chair for fifty years or so, shut away from all companionship as he has been,
and keep his ideas right up to the minute. If you ask me, I’ll say he’d make a
corking old pal. Full of pep--or would be if he weren’t crippled. It’s a
darned shame I never busted through the feud before. Why, fifty years ago he
was all through Nevada--think of that! I’d give ten years of my life to have
lived when he did, right at his elbow.”

He felt the sag in his pockets then and brought out the two little books.

“I always thought, Mother, that Grandfather King was a particularly wicked old
party. Well, that’s all wrong--same as the idea that he’s weak in the head. He
gave me this Bible, and made me promise to read it. He said--”

“_Bible?_” Rawley’s mother sat up sharply, and her mouth remained open, ready
for further words which her mind seemed unable to formulate.

“You bet. He said if I read it faithfully and got all the good out of it there
is in it, I’d thank him the rest of my life--or something like that. He meant
it, too.”

“Why, Rawley King! Your grandfather has always been an atheist of the worst
type! I’ve heard your father tell how he used to hear your grandfather
blaspheme and curse God by the hour for making him a cripple. When he was a
little boy--your father, I mean--he was deeply impressed by your grandmother
asking every prayer-meeting night for the prayers of the church to soften her
husband’s heart and turn his thoughts toward God. Your father has told me how
he used to go home afterwards and watch to see if your grandfather’s heart was
softened. But it never was--he got wickeder, if possible, and swore horribly
at everything, nearly. Your father said he nearly lost faith in prayer. But he
believed that the congregation never prayed as it should. I wouldn’t believe,
Rawley, that your grandfather would have a Bible near him. Are you sure?”

“Here it is,” Rawley assured her, grinning. “He said it was my legacy from
him.”

“Well, that proves to my mind he’s crazy,” his mother said grimly. “Your
father always felt that Grandfather King had sinned against the Holy Ghost and
_couldn’t_ repent. Anyway,” she added resentfully, “that’s about all you’ll
ever get from him. When he deeded this place to your father for a wedding
present--that was a little while after your grandmother died--he reserved the
west wing for himself as long as he lived. It’s in the deed that he’s not to
be interfered with or molested. When he dies, the west wing becomes a part of
this property--which is mine, of course. He lives on his pension, which just
about keeps him and that awful old Indian. Of course the pension stops when he
dies. So he was right about the legacy, at least. But I’ll bet he put a curse
on the Bible before he gave it to you. It would be just like him.”

Rawley shook his head dissentingly. “It’s darned hard to sit in a wheel chair
for fifty years,” he remarked somewhat irrelevantly. “I’d cuss things some,
myself, I reckon.” And he added abruptly, “Say, Grandfather’s got the bluest
eyes, Mother, I ever saw in a man’s head. I thought eyes faded with old age.
Did you ever notice his eyes, Mother?”

His mother laughed unpleasantly. “Your Grandfather King never gave me any
inducement to get close enough to see his eyes. Seeing him on the porch of the
west wing is enough for me.”

“He laid a good deal of stress upon his past,” said Rawley. “I suppose because
he hasn’t any present--and darned little future, I’m afraid. He gave me some
nuggets. Would you like a nugget ring, Mother?”

His mother glanced at the nuggets and pushed away Rawley’s hand that held them
cupped in the palm.

“No, I wouldn’t. Not if your Grandfather King had anything to do with it. He’s
been like a poison plant in the yard ever since I came here, Rawley; like
poison ivy, that you’re careful not to go near. I don’t want to touch anything
belonging to him--and I hope I’m not a vindictive woman, either.”

Rawley was rolling the nuggets in his hand, staring at them abstractedly.

“It’s queer--the whole thing,” he said finally. “I feel a sort of leaning
toward Grandfather. It was something in his eyes. You know, Mother, it must be
darned tough to have both legs chopped off at the knees when you’re a young
husky over six feet in your socks and full of pep. I--believe I can understand
Grandfather King. ‘A hunk of meat in a wheel chair’--that’s what he called
himself. And those amazing blue eyes of his--”

His mother glanced curiously into his face. “They can’t be any bluer than
yours, Rawley,” she observed.

Rawley looked up from the nuggets, his forehead wrinkled with surprise.

“Oh, do you think that, Mother?” He stood up suddenly, still shaking the
nuggets with a dull clink in his hand. “Well, I hope Grandfather’s passed on a
few more of his traits to me. There’s a few of them I’m going to need,” he
said drily and kissed his mother good night.




CHAPTER TWO

JOHNNY BUFFALO BEARS ANOTHER MESSAGE


In his room, Rawley switched on the light and slid into the big chair by the
table. Not to his mother could he confess how deeply those few minutes with
Grandfather King had stirred him. In spite of her attitude toward the silent
feud that had endured for nearly thirty years, he was conscious of the dull
ache of remorse. Without meaning to judge his parents or to criticize their
manner of handling a difficult situation, Rawley felt that night that he had
been guilty of a great wrong toward his grandfather. He at least should have
ignored the invisible wall that stood between the west wing and the rest of
the house. He was a King; he should not have permitted that reasonless silence
to endure through all these years.

As a matter of fact, Rawley’s life since he was twelve had been spent mostly
away from home. First, a military academy in the suburbs of St. Louis, with
the long hiking trips featured by the school through the summer vacations;
after that, college,--with a special course in mineralogy. Since then, field
work had claimed most of his time. Home had therefore been merely a place
pleasantly tucked away in his memory, with a visit to his mother now and then
between jobs.

The first twelve years of his life had thoroughly accustomed Rawley to the
sight of the fierce old man with long hair and his legs cut off at his knees,
who sometimes appeared in a wheel chair on a porch of the west wing, attended
by an Indian who looked savage enough to scalp a little boy if he ventured too
close; a ferocious Indian who scowled and wore his hair parted from forehead
to neck and braided in two long braids over his shoulder, and who padded
stealthily about the place in beautifully beaded moccasins and fringed
buckskin leggings.

Nevertheless, there had been times, as he grew older, when Rawley had been
tempted to invade the west wing and find out for himself just how bitterly his
grandfather clung to the feud. It hurt him to think now of the old man’s
isolation and of the interesting companionship he had cheated himself out of
enjoying.

He pulled the two old books from his pocket, handling them as if they were the
precious things his grandfather seemed to consider them. The Bible he opened
first, undoing the old-fashioned clasp with his thumb and opening the book at
the flyleaf. The inscription there was faded yet distinct on the yellowed
paper. The sloping, careful handwriting of Rawley’s great-grandmother sending
King, of the Mounted, forth upon his dangerous missions armed with the Word of
God,--and hoping prayerfully, no doubt, that he would read and heed its
precepts.

    To my beloved son,
    George Walter King,
    from his
    Affectionate Mother.

The date thrilled Rawley, aged twenty-six: 1858 was the year his
great-grandmother had inscribed in the book. To Rawley it seemed almost as
remote as the Stamp Act or the Mexican War. The thought that Grandfather King,
away back in 1858, had been old enough to join the Missouri Mounted
Volunteers--even to have been made a sergeant in his company and to make for
himself a reputation as an Indian fighter--gave the old man a new dignity in
the eyes of his grandson. It seemed strange that Grandfather King was still
alive and could talk of those days.

The book itself was strangely contradictory in appearance. While the outside
was worn and scuffed as if with much usage, the inside crackled faintly a
protest against unaccustomed handling. The yellowed leaves clung together in
layers which Rawley must carefully separate. Now and then a line or two showed
faint penciled underscores; otherwise the book did not look as if it had been
opened for many, many years. Nowhere was it thumbed and soiled by the frequent
reading of a man living under canvas or the open sky.

“Looks to me like the old boy has simply passed the buck,” Rawley grinned.
“Maybe he felt as if some one in the family ought to read it. His mother had
it all marked for him, too; wanted to give him a good start-off, maybe. No,
sir, the old book itself is pinning it onto King, of the Mounted! Mother must
be right, after all, and Grandfather never had enough religion to talk about.
But he sure gave me a Sunday-school talk; funny how a book can stand up and
call you a liar.”

He smiled as he closed the book, whimsically shaking his head over the joke.
Then, just to make sure that his guess was correct, Rawley opened the Bible
again. No, there could be no mistake. Crackly new on the inside--though
yellowed with age--badly worn on the outside, the book itself proclaimed the
story of long carrying and little reading. The evidence against the sincerity
of the old man’s pious admonitions was conclusive. Rawley laid the Bible down
for a further consideration and took up the worn old diary.

Here, too, Grandfather King had betrayed a certain lack of sincerity. Reading
the faded entries, Rawley decided that King, of the Mounted, must have been an
impetuous youth who had learned caution with the years. Dates, arrivals,
departures,--these remained. Incidents, however, had for the most part been
neatly sliced out with a knife. And with a stubborn disregard for the opinion
of later readers the stubs of the pages elided had been left to tell of the
deliberate mutilation of the record. So Rawley read perfunctorily the dry
record of obscure scouting trips, and the names of commanders long since dead
and remembered only in the records.

Rawley learned that his grandfather had taken part in the making of much
frontier history. He spoke of Captain Hunt in a matter-of-fact way and
mentioned the date on which a certain Captain Hendley had been killed by
Indians somewhere near Las Vegas, in Nevada. On the next page Rawley found
this gruesome paragraph:

    From a young Indian captured in the battle of last week, I learned the
    secret of the devilish poisoned arrows, which are black. The black
    arrows are poisoned in this manner, he tells me, and since I have
    befriended him in many small ways I do not doubt his word. To procure
    the poison, an animal is slain and the liver removed. A captured
    rattlesnake is then induced to strike the liver again and again,
    injecting all of its poison into the meat. The arrow-points are
    afterwards rubbed in the putrid mass and left to dry. Needless to say,
    a wound touched by this poison and decayed meat surely causes death.
    The young Indian tells me that a certain desert plant has been
    successfully used as an antidote, but he did not tell me the name of
    the plant. He declared that he did not know, that only the doctors of
    his tribe know that secret.

    I think he lied. He was willing to tell me the horrid means of making
    the poison. But is too cunning to let me know the antidote. So the
    tobacco I’ve given him is after all wasted. The information merely
    increases my dread of the black arrows. Rattlesnake venom and putrid
    liver--paugh! I shall--

A page was missing. Followed several pages of brief entries, with long lapses
of time between. Then came a page which gave a glimpse into that colorful
life:

    June, 1866. On board the “Esmeralda.” Arrived at El Dorado
    (_Deuteronomy_, 2:36) to-day. This is the first boat up the river.

The Scriptural reference had been inserted in very small writing above the
name of the place. Evidently Grandfather King had been reading some Bible, if
not the one his mother had given him.

    A town has sprung up in the wilderness since I was here last, cursing
    the heat and stinging gnats in ’59. A stamp mill stands at the river’s
    edge and houses are scattered all up and down the river, while a ferry
    crosses to the other shore. A crowd came down to the landing for their
    mail and to see what strangers were on the boat. As yet I do not know
    whether our company will be stationed here or at Fort Callville, a few
    miles up the canyon. The Indians are quiet, they say. Too quiet, some
    of the miners think. On the edge of the crowd I saw a young squaw--or
    perhaps she is Spanish. She has the velvet eyes and the dark rose
    blooming in her cheeks, which speaks of Spanish blood. By God, she’s
    beautiful! Not more than sixteen and graceful as a fairy. I leaned
    over the rail--

Several pages were cut from the book just there, and Rawley swore to himself.
When one is twenty-six one resents any interruption in a romance. The next
entry read:

    July 4th. Great doings at the fort to-day, with barbeque, wrestling,
    target practice and gambling. Miners and Indians came out of the hills
    to celebrate the holiday. In the wrestling matches I easily held my
    own, as in the sharp-shooting. Anita received my message and was
    here--el gusto de mi corazon. What a damned pity she’s not white! But
    she’s more Spanish than Indian, with her proud little ways and her
    light heart. Jess Cramer tried again to come between us, and there was
    a fight not down on the program. They carried him to the hospital. A
    little more and I’d have broken his back, the surgeon said. If he
    looks at her again--

More elision just when the interest was keenest. Rawley wanted to know more
about Anita--“the joy of my heart”, as Grandfather had set it down in Spanish.
The next page, however, whetted Rawley’s curiosity a bit more:

    July 15th. To-morrow we march to Las Vegas to meet a party of emigrants
    and guard them to San Bernardino. The Indians are unsettled and traveling
    is not safe. A miner was murdered and scalped within ten miles of the fort
    the other day. No mi alebro--Anita wept and clung to me when I told her we
    had marching orders. Dulce corazon--God, how I wish she was white! But in
    any case I could not take her with me. I shall return in a month’s time--

    August. In hospital, after a hellish trip in a wagon with other wounded.
    Mohave Indians attacked our wagon train, one hundred miles northeast of
    here, on the desert. While leading a charge afoot against the Indians I
    was shot through both legs. Gangrene set in before we could reach this
    place, and the doctor will not promise the speedy recovery I desire.

    My Indian boy, Johnny Buffalo, refuses to leave my side. He hates all
    other whites. On the desert I picked him up half dead with thirst, and set
    him before me on the saddle because he feared the wagons. I judge him to
    be about ten. If I live, I shall keep the boy with me and train him for my
    body-servant. A faithful Indian is better than a watch-dog--

A lapse of several months intervened before the next entry. Then a brief
record, which told of the closing of one romance and the beginning of another:

    November 15th. This day I married Mary Jane Rawlins. Was able to stand
    during the ceremony, supported by two crutches. My Indian boy slipped
    away from the others and stood close behind me during the service, one
    hand clutching tightly my coat-tail. Mary has courage, to wish to
    marry a man likely to be a cripple the rest of his days.

Nothing further was recorded for several years; four, to be exact. Then:

    Returned to-day from hospital. After all this suffering, both legs were
    taken off above the knee. The poison had spread to the joints. What a pity
    it was not my neck.

On the next page was one grim line:

    December 4th, 1889. My wife, Mary Rawlins King, was buried to-day.

That ended the diary. In a memorandum pocket just inside the cover, a folded
paper lay snug and flat. Rawley drew it forth eagerly and held it close to the
lamp. His face clouded then with disappointment, for nothing was written on
the paper save a list of Bible references.

So that was the legacy. An old diary just interesting enough to be
tantalizing, with half the pages cut out; Bible references probably given to
King, of the Mounted, by his mother. And a worn old Bible that had never been
read. Rawley stacked the books one upon the other and leaned back in his
chair, staring at them meditatively while he filled his pipe. He took three
puffs before he laughed silently.

“He was a speedy old bird, I’ll say that much for him,” he told himself. “I’ll
bet those pages he cut out fairly sizzled. And I’ll bet he cut them out about
the time he married Grandmother. Also, I think he left one or two pages by
mistake. Well, I’ll say he lived! As long as he had two good legs under him he
was up and coming. I don’t suppose there’s a chance in the world of getting
him to talk about Anita. ‘_El gusto de mi corazon_--’ There’s nothing like the
Spanish for love-making words. And that was in July--and he married
Grandmother in November. Poor little half-breed girl who should have been
white! But then, I reckon he’d have gone back to her if he could. But they
sent him home--crippled for life. You can’t blame Grandfather, after all. And
I notice he mentioned the fact that Grandmother wanted to marry him. Sorry for
the handsome young soldier on crutches, but it’s darned hard on Anita, just
the same. And I don’t suppose he could even get word to her.”

He smoked the pipe out, his thoughts gone a-questing into the long ago, where
the black arrows were dipped in loathsome poison, and young Indian girls had
the fire and grace of the Spaniards.

“She’d be old, too, by now--if she’s alive,” he thought, as he knocked the
ashes from his pipe and yawned. “I wonder if she ever forgot. And I wonder if
Grandfather ever thinks of her now. He does, I’ll bet. Those terrible, blue
eyes! They _couldn’t_ forget.”

He went to bed, his imagination still held to the days of the fighting old
frontier; still building adventures and romances for the dashing, blue-eyed
King, of the Mounted.

He was dreaming of an Indian fight when a sharp tapping on his window woke him
to gray dawn. He sprang out of bed, still knuckling the sleep out of his eyes,
and saw Johnny Buffalo standing close to the open screen. The Indian raised a
hand.

“You come quick. Your grandfather is dead.”




CHAPTER THREE

“MY HEART IS DEAD”


It was the evening after the funeral, and Rawley was sitting again on the
porch, staring out gloomily over a cold pipe into the yard. His grandfather’s
death had hit him a harder blow than he would have thought possible. The shock
of it, coming close on the heels of his first keen realization that
Grandfather King was a vivid personality, left him numbed with a sense of
loss.

His mother’s evident relief at the removal of an unpleasant problem chilled
and irritated him. Her calm assumption that the Indian must also be removed
from the place, now that his master was gone, seemed to Rawley almost like
sacrilege. The place belonged to his mother only by right of his grandfather’s
generosity. To rob the Indian of a home he had enjoyed since boyhood was
unthinkable.

He turned his head and glanced toward the west wing, his eyes following his
thoughts. A dimly outlined figure stood erect upon the porch of the west wing.
Pity gripped Rawley by the throat; pity and half-conscious admiration. Even
the greatest grief of his life could not bow the shoulders of Johnny Buffalo.
With no definite purpose, drawn only by the kinship of their loss, Rawley
rose, crossed the grass plot by the syringas and sat down on the top step of
the west porch.

Johnny Buffalo stood with his arms folded, the fringe on his buckskin sleeves
whipping gently in the soft breeze that rose when the sun went down. He was
staring straight out at nothing,--the nothingness that epitomized his future.
Rawley slanted a glance up at him and began thoughtfully refilling his pipe.
By his silence he was unconsciously bringing himself close to the soul of the
Indian, the traditions of whose race forbade hasty speech.

Half a pipe Rawley smoked, staring meditatively into the dusk. In that time
Johnny Buffalo had moved no more than if he were a statue of brown stone. Then
Rawley tipped his head sidewise and looked up at him.

“Sit down, Johnny. I want to talk.”

“Talk is useless when the heart is dead,” said Johnny Buffalo after a long
pause. But he came down two steps and seated himself, straight-backed, head
up, beside Rawley.

“The man I love is cold. His spirit has gone. So I am left cold, and my heart
is dead. I shall wait--and be glad when my body is dead.”

Rawley felt a sharp constriction in his throat. For one moment he almost hated
his mother who would drive this stricken old man out into a world he did not
know. A gun against his temple would be kinder. He drew a long breath.

“Would you like to wait here, where he lived?” Intuitively he crystallized his
thoughts into the briefest words possible to express his meaning.

Johnny Buffalo shook his head slowly, with a decisiveness that could not be
questioned. He folded his arms again across his grief-laden breast.

“It is your mother’s. In the fields I can wait for death, which is my friend.
I shall walk toward the land of my people. When death finds me I shall smile.”

Rawley turned this over in his mind, seeking some point where argument might
break down bitter resolution.

“Cowards wait for death when life grows hard,” he said at last. “The brave man
meets life and faces sorrow because he is brave and will overcome. The brave
man fights death which is an enemy. He does not run away from life and welcome
his enemy. My grandfather found life very hard. For fifty years my grandfather
faced it because his spirit was strong.”

“Your grandfather’s spirit was strong. His body was broken. My body is strong.
My spirit is broken. Can a strong body live with a broken spirit inside?”

Rawley had to smoke over this for a while. Johnny Buffalo, he conceded
privately, was no man’s fool. Rawley tried to put himself in the Indian’s
place and discover, if he could, something that would make life worth the
living.

“Your people are scattered,” he said quietly. “Few are left. The Mohaves are a
broken tribe.”

“The Mohaves are not my people,” the Indian corrected him calmly. “I am
Pahute. In the mountains along the river you call the Colorado, my people
lived and hunted--and fought. My uncle was the chief, and I was proud. One day
my mother beat me with a stick. I took my bow and my arrows and some dried
meat, and that night I left my people, for I was angry and ashamed. With my
bow I had killed two mountain sheep. With my bow I had hidden in the rocks and
had wounded a white man who was digging in the hillside. I thought I was a
warrior and not to be beaten by a squaw.

“The great thirst found me as I was walking toward the mountains where all my
life I had seen the sun go down. With my bow and arrow I could get meat, but I
could not get water. All my life I had lived near the river. The great thirst
I did not know.

“I fell in the sand. When I awoke, water was in my mouth. I looked, and I was
lying in the arms of a white man. He was big and strong and very handsome. He
was Sergeant King. Your grandfather. I looked into his eyes and I was not
afraid. There was no hate in my heart for him, but all other whites I hated.
He lifted me and carried me in his arms and laid me in a wagon with white
women and children. I hated them. I was weak from the thirst and from much
walking, but I bit deep into the arm of a woman who put her hand on me.

“There was much yelling in that wagon. The woman struck me many times. A horse
came galloping. Your grandfather lifted me out of the wagon and put me on the
horse with him. So we rode together in one saddle. I loved him.

“The Mohaves attacked the whites when we had gone many days. My sergeant left
me with his horse by the wagons. He crept behind bushes and killed many. He
was a great warrior and I was proud when his gun brought death to a Mohave. I
watched him, for I loved him. When I saw him fall from his knees and lie on
his face in the sand, I jumped from the horse and went creeping through the
brush. He was not dead. I took his gun and killed Mohaves. Pretty soon my
sergeant looked at me and smiled while I killed. When there were no more
Mohaves, the captain came. They put my sergeant in a wagon and I sat beside
him. I gave him water, I gave him food. With my fists I beat back those who
would take from me the joy of serving him.

“A long time he was sick in the town we entered. I was with him. Every day and
every night he could open his eyes and see that I was with him.”

The sonorous voice ceased its monotone and the Indian sat silent, staring into
the past. After a while he turned his head and looked full at Rawley.

“I was a boy when he took me. Now I am an old man. Since he took me there has
been no night when my sergeant could call and get no answer. There has been no
day when my sergeant could look and could not see me. Now my sergeant is gone.
My heart is gone with him.”

Enthralled by the picture vividly painted with bold strokes by the Indian,
Rawley sat hunched over his pipe, cuddling the cooling bowl in his fingers.

“Your sergeant was my grandfather. At the last I loved him, too. I am a King.
I need you.” His tone stamped the lie as truth. Later he would find some way
of making it the truth, he thought.

Johnny Buffalo eyed him sharply in the deepening dusk.

“You have read the book?” he asked after a minute. “If you have read, then I
will go with you. The spirit of my sergeant will go. My heart may live again.”

“What book?” Rawley’s eyes widened.

“Your grandfather gave you the book. Your grandfather commanded that you
read.” Reproach was in the voice of Johnny Buffalo.

“I have read the diary--the book where he wrote of his travels. Do you mean
that book?”

Johnny Buffalo gave a grunt that was pure Indian and signified disgust.

Rawley frowned over the puzzle and his very evident defection. It must be the
Bible that was meant, he decided. But he could see no reason why he should
read the Bible and then go somewhere. Still, the thing seemed to have pulled
Johnny Buffalo out of his slough of despond, and that was what Rawley had been
working for.

“If you mean the Bible,” he said tentatively, “I read it a little, that
night.”

Johnny Buffalo peered at him. “Read that book more. Your grandfather commanded
that you should read. I heard the promise you gave. You said, ‘You bet.’ It
was a promise to obey your grandfather.”

“I mean to keep the promise,” Rawley replied defensively. “I haven’t had time.
Things have been pretty much upset since that night.”

The Indian meditated. “You read,” he admonished after due deliberation. “Your
grandfather never talked to make words. I think he would have told you more.
But his spirit went. I will stay in a tent by the river. When you have read,
you come. We will talk more when you have read.”

Rawley felt the dismissal under the words. He offered the Indian money, which
was refused by a gesture. Then, conscious of a certain vague excitement in the
back of his mind, he went back to his own part of the house.




CHAPTER FOUR

RAWLEY READS THE BIBLE


In his room again, Rawley unlocked his desk and got the two books which were
his “legacy.” He was young, and for all his technical training the spirit of
romance called to his youth. There was something particularly important,
something urgent in the admonition that he should read the Scriptures.
Rawley’s training was all against vague speculations. Your mining engineer
fights guesswork at every stage of his profession.

He sat down with the books in his hand and began to reason the thing out
cold-bloodedly, as if it were a problem in mineral formations. He undid the
clasp of the Bible, opened it and looked through all the leaves, seeking for
some hidden paper. He spent half an hour in the search and discovered nothing.
There was no message, then, hidden in the Bible. His grandfather must have
meant the actual reading of the text itself.

Then he remembered the paper filled with references, hidden in the pocket of
the diary. There might be something significant in that, he thought. He opened
the diary, took out the paper and glanced down the list of references. They
were scattered all through the book and there were sixty-four of them.

He opened the Bible again and began to look for the first one--I Kings, 20:3.
The leaves stuck together, they turned in groups, they seemed determined that
he should not find I Kings anywhere in the book. Daniel, Joshua, Jeremiah,
Zechariah and Esther he peered into; there didn’t seem to be any Kings.

He muttered a word frequently found in the Bible, laid the book down and went
to the living room, to the big, embossed Family Bible that had his birth date
in it and the date of his father’s death; and pictures at which he had been
permitted to look on Sunday afternoons if he were a good boy. His mother had
gone out to some meeting or other. He had the room to himself and he could
read at his leisure.

It struck him immediately that this Bible had not been much read either. But
the leaves were thick enough to turn singly, the print was large, and if I
Kings were present he felt that he had some chance of finding it. With pencil
and paper beside him, and with the list of references in one hand, he
therefore set himself methodically to the task. And he was twenty-six, and the
blood of the adventurous Kings beat strongly in his veins. So when he had
found the book and the chapter which headed the list, he ran his finger down
the half-column to the third verse; and this is what he read:

    Thy silver and thy gold is mine; thy wives also and thy children, even
    the goodliest, are mine.

Rawley was conscious of a slight chill of disappointment when he had written
it down in his fine, beautifully exact, draftsman’s handwriting. But he went
doggedly to work on the next reference nevertheless:

    _Psalms_, 73:7. Their eyes stand out with fatness; they have more than
    heart could wish.

This was no more promising, but he had promised to read, and this seemed to
him the most practical method of getting at his grandfather’s secret purpose
and thoughts. So he settled himself down to an evening’s hard labor with book
and paper.

He was just finishing the work when he heard his mother’s footsteps on the
porch. Rather guiltily he closed the Bible and folded his notes, so that his
mother, coming into the room, found Rawley standing before a large window,
thoughtfully gazing out into the dark while he stuffed tobacco in his pipe.
His mother was a religious woman and a member of the church, but she took her
religion according to certain fixed rules. Reading the Bible casually,
apparently for entertainment, would have required an explanation,--and Rawley
did not want to explain, least of all to his mother.

He listened with perfunctory interest to her account of the evening’s
edifications (a Swedish missionary having lectured in his own tongue, with an
interpreter) and escaped when he could to his room. He wanted to be alone
where he could try and guess the riddle his grandfather had placed before him.

That there was a message of some kind hidden away in the Scriptural
quotations, Rawley felt absolutely certain. In the first place, they did not
seem to him such passages as a devout person would cherish for the comfort
they held. Moreover, certain verses had been repeated, although the text
itself did not seem to justify such emphasis. Precious metals, and journeyings
into rough country, he decided, was the dominant note of the citations and the
net result was confusing to say the least. If his grandfather really intended
that he should discover any meaning in the jumble, he should have furnished a
key, Rawley told himself disgustedly, some time after midnight, when he had
read the quotations over and over until his head ached and they seemed more
meaningless than at first.

But his grandfather had told him emphatically that there was a lot in the
Bible, if he read it carefully enough. There might have been in the statement
no meaning deeper than an old man’s whim, but Rawley could not bring himself
to believe it. Somewhere in those verses a secret lay hidden, and Rawley did
not mean to give up until he had solved the problem.

At daylight the next morning Rawley awoke with what he considered an
inspiration. He swung out of bed and with his bathrobe over his shoulders made
a stealthy pilgrimage into the old-fashioned library where the conventional
aggregation of “works” were to be found in leather-bound sets. Squatting on
his haunches, he inspected a certain dim corner filled with fiction of the
type commonly accepted as standard. He chose a volume and returned to bed,
leaving one of his heelless slippers behind him in his absorption in the
mystery.

He crawled back into bed and read Poe’s “Gold Bug” before breakfast, giving
particular attention to the elucidation of the cipher contained in the story.
The general effect of this research work was not illuminating. Poe’s cipher
had been worked out with numbers, whereas Grandfather King had carelessly
muffled his meaning in many words; unless the book, chapter and verse numbers
were intended to convey the message in cipher similar to Poe’s.

This possibility struck Rawley in the middle of his shaving. He could not wait
to put the theory to the test, but hastily wiped the razor, and the lather
from one side of his face, opened his grandfather’s old Bible at the index and
began setting down the number of each book above its name in the reference
list. Thus, I Kings, 20:3 became the numerals 11-20-3.

He was eagerly at work at this when his mother called him to breakfast. His
mother was a woman who worked industriously at being cultured. She had a
secret ambition to be called behind her back a brilliant conversationalist.
Breakfast, therefore, was always an uncomfortable meal for Rawley whenever his
mother had attended some instructive gathering the evening before.

While he ate his first muffin, Rawley listened to a foggy interpretation of
the Swedish lecturer’s ideas upon universal brotherhood. Rather, he sat quiet
while his mother talked. Then he interrupted her shockingly.

“Say, Mother, do you know whether Grandfather ever read Poe?”

A swallow of coffee went down his mother’s “Sunday throat.” It was some
minutes before she could reply, and by that time Rawley had decided that
perhaps he had better not bother his mother about the cipher. He patted her on
the back, begged her pardon for asking foolish questions, and escaped to his
own room, where he spent the whole day with “The Gold Bug” opened before him
at the page which contained Poe’s rule concerning the frequency with which
certain letters occur in the alphabet.

That evening there was a fine litter of papers scribbled over with letters and
numbers, singly and in groups. Rawley could not get two words that made sense.
The thing simply didn’t work. If his grandfather had ever read Poe’s “Gold
Bug”, he certainly had not used it for a pattern.

He went back to his sixty-four Bible verses and began studying them again. But
he could not see any reason why Grandfather King should claim any one’s wives
and children, whose “eyes stand out with fatness.” The third and fourth verses
were intelligible;

    _Proverbs_, 2:1. My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my
    commandments with thee.

    _II Chronicles_, 1:12. Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee; and I
    will give thee riches, and wealth, and honor, such as none of the kings
    have had that have been before thee, neither shall there any after thee
    have the like.

Even the next three lent themselves to a possible personal meaning:

    _Psalms_, 2:10. Be wise now therefore, oh ye kings; be instructed, ye
    judges of the earth.

    _I Chronicles_, 22:16. Of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the
    iron, there is no number. Rise, therefore, and be doing and the Lord be
    with thee.

    _Deuteronomy_, 11:11. But the land, whither ye go to possess it, is a land
    of hills and valleys, and drinketh water of the rain of heaven.

After that, he was all at sea.

He picked up the little Bible and opened it again. It must be there that the
message was hidden; and Rawley felt very sure, by now, that the Bible
quotations held the secret. The book opened at the eleventh chapter of
Deuteronomy. Here was a verse marked,--a verse made familiar to Rawley in his
hours of exhaustive study. Only a part of the verse was marked, however, by a
penciled line drawn faintly beneath certain words.

With a sudden excitement Rawley seized a fresh sheet of paper and wrote down
the marked passage, “The land whither ye go to possess it is a land of hills
and valleys.”

Painstakingly then he began at the beginning of the reference list and worked
his way once more through book, chapter and verse. But this time he used his
grandfather’s Bible and copied only such parts of the verse as were
underscored. Now he was on the right track, and as he wrote his excitement
grew apace. From a hopeless jumble, the verses conveyed to him this message:

    ... Gold is mine ... more than heart could wish. My son, if thou wilt
    receive my words and hide my commandments with thee ... I will give thee
    riches, and wealth ... such as none of the kings have had that have been
    before thee. Be wise now, therefore, be instructed. Of the gold ... there
    is no number. The land whither ye go to possess it is a land of hills and
    valleys. Do this now, my son. Go through ... the city which is by the
    river in the wilderness ... yet making many rich. In the midst thereof ...
    a ferry-boat ... which is by the brink of the river. Take victuals with
    you for the journey ... turn you northward into the wilderness ... to a
    great and high mountain ... cedar trees in abundance ... scattered over
    the face of ... the high mountain. In the cliffs ... there is a path which
    no fowl knoweth, and which the vulture’s eye hath not seen. Come to the
    top of the mount ... pass over unto the other side ... westward ... on the
    hillside ... a very great heap of stones ... joined ... to ... a dry tree.
    Go into the clefts of the rocks ... into the tops of the jagged rocks ...
    to the sides of the pit ... take heed now ... that is ... exceeding deep.
    It is hid from the eyes of all living ... creep into ... the midst thereof
    ... eastward ... two hundred, fourscore and eight ... feet ... ye shall
    find ... a pure river of water ... proceed no further ... there is gold
    ... heavier than the sand ... pure gold ... upon the sand. And all the
    gold ... thou shalt take up ... then shalt thou prosper if thou takest
    heed ... I know thy poverty, but thou art rich ... take heed now ... On
    the hillside ... which is upon the bank of the river ... in the wilderness
    ... there shall the vultures also be gathered ... ye shall find ... him
    that ... is mine enemy ... his mouth is full of cursing ... under his
    tongue is mischief and vanity ... be watchful ... the heart is desperately
    wicked ... He that keepeth his mouth keepeth his life ... I put my trust
    in thee. Now, my son, the Lord be with thee and prosper thou.

His first impulse was to find Johnny Buffalo. He folded the paper, slipped it
safely into a pocket and reached for his hat. He had neglected to ask the
Indian just where he meant to make his camp, but he felt sure that he could
find him. Indeed, when he stopped in the path halfway to the front gate and
looked toward the west wing, he could just discern a figure standing on the
porch. So he crossed the grass plot and in a moment stood before Johnny
Buffalo.

Again his mood impelled him to the manner that most appealed to the old
Indian, nephew of a chief of his tribe. He waited for a space before he spoke.
And when he did speak it was in the restrained tone which had won the Indian’s
confidence the evening before.

“I have read,” he stated quietly, “and I know what it is that Grandfather
meant. If we can go inside I’ll read it to you.”

“The door is locked.” Johnny Buffalo pointed one finger over his shoulder. “It
is a new lock put there by your mother. She does not want me to go in.”

Rawley pressed his lips tightly together before he dared trust himself to
speak. He looked at the barred door, thought of the room he had seen, its
furnishings enriched by a hundred little mementoes of the past that belonged
to his soldier grandfather. He had a swift, panicky fear that his mother would
call in a second-hand furniture dealer and take what price he offered for the
stuff. That, he promised himself, he would prevent at all costs.

“Come into my room, then,” he invited. “I want to read you what I discovered.”

“No. The house is your mother’s. We will go to my camp.”

So it was by the light of a camp fire, with the Mississippi flowing
majestically past them under the stars, that Rawley first read as a complete
document the Scriptural fragments that contained his grandfather’s message.
Away in the northeast the lights of St. Louis set the sky aglow. Little
lapping waves crept like licking lips against the bank with a whispery sound
that mingled pleasantly with the subdued crackling of the fire. Across the
leaping flames, Johnny Buffalo sat with his brown, corded hands upon his
knees, his black braids drawn neatly forward across his chest. His lean face
with its high nose and cheek bones flared into light or grew shadowed as the
flames reached toward him or drew away. His lips were pressed firmly together,
as if he had learned well the lesson of setting their seal against his
thoughts.

“There is one point I thought you might be able to tell me,” Rawley said,
looking across the fire when he had finished reading. “This ‘City which is by
the river in the wilderness’--and ‘In the midst thereof a ferryboat which is
by the brink of the river.’ Do you know what place is meant by that? Is it El
Dorado, Nevada? Because Grandfather’s diary tells of going up the river to El
Dorado. And I remember, now, there was some kind of Bible reference written
over the name. I don’t remember what it was, though. I didn’t look it up.
We’ll have to make sure about that, for the directions start from that point.
It says we’re to go through the city which is by the river, and turn
northward--and so on.”

The Indian reached out a hand, lifted a stick of wood and laid it across the
fire. His eyes turned toward the river.

“Many times, when the air was warm and the stars sat in their places to watch
the night, my sergeant came here with me, and I gathered wood to make a fire.
Many hours he would sit here in his chair beside the river. Sometimes he would
talk. His words were of the past when he was the strongest of all men.
Sometimes his words were of El Dorado. It is a city by the river, and a
ferryboat is in the midst thereof. It has made many rich with the gold they
dig from the mountains. I think that is the city you must go through.”

“There isn’t any city now,” Rawley told him. “It’s been abandoned for years. I
don’t think there’s a town there, any more.”

“There is the place by the river,” Johnny Buffalo observed calmly. “There is
the great and high mountain. There is ‘the path that no man knoweth.’”

“Yes, you bet. And we’re going to find it, Johnny Buffalo. I’ve got a chance
to go out that way this month, to examine a mine. I didn’t think I’d take the
job. I wanted to go to Mexico. But now, of course, it will be Nevada, and I’ll
want you to go with me. Do you know that country?”

A strange expression lightened the Indian’s face for an instant.

“When I killed my first meat,” he said, “I could walk from the kill to the
city by the river. My father’s tent was no more distant than it is from here
to the great city yonder. Not so far, I think. The way was rough with many
hills.”

Impulsively Rawley leaned and stretched out his arm toward the Indian.

“Let’s shake on it. We will go together, and you will be my partner. Whatever
we find is the gift of my grandfather, and half of it is yours when we find
it. I feel he’d want it that way. Is it a go, Johnny Buffalo?”

Something very much like a smile stirred the old man’s lips. He took Rawley’s
hand and gave it a solemn shake, once up, once down, as is the way of the
Indian.

“It is go. You are like my sergeant when he held me in his arms and gave me
water from his canteen. You are my son. Where you go I will go with you.”




CHAPTER FIVE

A CITY FORSAKEN


The storekeeper at Nelson stood on his little slant-roofed porch and mopped
his beaded forehead with a blue calico handkerchief. The desert wrinkles
around his eyes drew together and deepened as he squinted across the acarpous
gulch where a few rough-board shacks stood forlorn with uncurtained windows,
to the heat-ridden hillside beyond.

“It’s going to be awful hot down there by the river,” he observed
deprecatingly. “You’ll find the water pretty muddy--but maybe you know that.
Strangers don’t always; it’s best to make sure, so if you haven’t a bucket or
something to settle the water in, I’d advise you to take one along. I’ve an
extra one I could lend you, if you need it.”

“We have a bucket, thanks.” Rawley stepped into the dust-covered car loaded
with camp outfit. “El Dorado is right at the mouth of the canyon, isn’t it?”

The storekeeper gave him an odd look. “This is El Dorado,” he answered drily.
“This whole canyon is the El Dorado. There used to be a town at the mouth of
the canyon, but that’s gone years ago. Better take the left-hand road when you
get down here a quarter of a mile or so. That will take you past the
Techatticup Mine. Below there, turn to the right where two shacks stand close
together in the fork of the road. The other trail’s washed, and I don’t know
as you could get down that way. Car in good shape for the pull back? She’s
pretty steep, coming this way.”

“She’s pulled everything we’ve struck, so far,” Rawley replied cheerfully.
“Other cars make it, don’t they?”

“Some do--and some holler for help. It’s a long, hard drag up the wash. And if
you tackle it in the hot part of the day you’ll need plenty of water. And,”
the storekeeper added with a whimsical half-smile, “the hot part of the day is
any time between sunrise and dark. It does get _awful_ hot down in there! I
don’t mean to knock my own district,” he added, “but I don’t like to see any
one start down the canyon without knowing about what to expect. Then, if they
want to go, that’s their business.”

“That’s the way to look at it,” Rawley agreed. “I expect you’ve been here a
good while, haven’t you?”

The storekeeper wiped a fresh collection of beads from his forehead. He looked
up and down the canyon rather wistfully.

“About as many years as you are old,” he said quietly. “I came in here
twenty-five years ago.”

Rawley laughed. “I was about a year old when you landed. Seems a long while
back, to me.” He stepped on the starter, waved his hand to the storekeeper and
went grinding away down the steep trail through the loose sand. Johnny
Buffalo, sitting beside him, lifted a hand and laid it on his arm.

“Stop! He calls,” he said.

Rawley stopped the car, his head tilted outward, looking back. The storekeeper
was coming down the trail toward them.

“I forgot to tell you there’s a bad Indian loose in the hills somewhere along
the river,” he panted when he came up. “He’s waylaid a couple of prospectors
that we know of. A blood feud against the whites, the Indians tell me. You may
not run across him at all, but it will be just as well to keep an eye out.”

“What’s his name?” Johnny Buffalo turned his head and stared hard at the
other.

“His name’s Queo. He’s middle-aged--somewhere in the late forties, I should
say. Medium-sized and kind of stocky built. He’ll kill to get grub or tobacco.
Seeing there’s two of you he might not try anything, but I’d be careful, if I
were in your place. There’s a price on his head, so if he tries any tricks--”
He waved his hand and grinned expressively as he turned back to the store.

“He is older than that man thinks,” said Johnny Buffalo after a silence. “Queo
has almost as many years as I have. When we were children we fought. He is
bad. For him to kill is pleasure, but he is a coward.”

“If there is a price on his head he has probably left the country,” Rawley
remarked indifferently. “Old-timers are fine people, most of them. But they do
like to tell it wild to tenderfeet. I suppose that’s human nature.”

Johnny Buffalo did not argue the point. He seemed content to gaze at the hills
in the effort to locate old landmarks. And as for Rawley himself, his mind was
wholly absorbed by his mission into the country, which he had dreamed of for
more than a month. There had been some delay in getting started. First, he
could not well curtail the length of his visit with his mother, in spite of
the fact that they seemed to have little in common. Then he thought it wise to
make the trip to Kingman and report upon a property there which was about to
be sold for a good-sized fortune. The job netted him several hundred dollars,
which he was likely to need. Wherefore he had of necessity had plenty of time
to dream over his own fortune which might be lying in the hills--“In the cleft
of the jagged rocks”--waiting for him to find it.

Just at first he had been somewhat skeptical. Fifty years is a long time for
gold to remain hidden in the hills of a mining country so rich as Nevada,
without some prospector discovering it. But Johnny Buffalo believed. Whether
his belief was based solely upon his faith in his sergeant, Rawley could not
determine. But Johnny Buffalo had a very plausible argument in favor of the
gold remaining where Grandfather King had left it in the underground stream.

The fact that Rawley was exhorted to “take victuals for the journey” meant a
distance of a good many miles, perhaps, which they must travel from El Dorado.
Then, they were to go to the top of a very high mountain and pass over on the
other side. Johnny Buffalo argued that the start was to be made from El Dorado
merely because the mountain would be most visible from that point. It would be
rough country, he contended. The code mentioned cliffs and great heaps of
stones and clefts in jagged rocks, with a deep pit, “Hid from the eyes of all
living,” for the final goal. He thought it more than likely that Grandfather
King’s gold mine was still undiscovered. And toward the last, Rawley had been
much more inclined to believe him. He had read diligently all the mining
information he could get concerning this particular district, as far back as
the records went. Nowhere was any mention made of such a rich placer discovery
on--or in--a mountain.

He was thinking all this as he drove the devious twistings and turnings of the
canyon road. Another mine or two they passed; then, nosing carefully down a
hill steeper than the others, they turned sharply to the left and were in the
final discomfort of the “wash.” A veritable sweat box it was on this
particular hot afternoon in July. The baked, barren hills rose close on either
side. Like a deep, gravelly river bed long since gone dry, the wash sloped
steeply down toward the Colorado. Rawley could readily understand now the
solicitude of the storekeeper. The return was quite likely to be a time of
tribulation.

He had expected to come upon a camp of some sort. But the canyon opened
bleakly to the river, the hot sand of its floor sloping steeply to meet the
lapping waves of the turgid stream. At the water’s edge, on the first high
ground of the bank, were ruins of an old stamp mill, which might have been
built ten years ago or a hundred, so far as looks went.

He left the car and climbed upon the cement floor of the old mill. What at
first had seemed to be a greater extension of the plant he now discovered was
a walled roadway winding up to the crest of the hill. He swung about and gazed
to the northward, as the Bible code had commanded that he should travel. A
mile or so up the river were the walls of a deep canyon,--Black Canyon,
according to his map. Farther away, set back from the river a mile, perhaps
two miles, a sharp-pointed hill shouldered up above its fellows. This seemed
to be the highest mountain, so far as he could see, in that direction. If that
were the “great and high mountain” described in the code, their journey would
not be so long as Johnny Buffalo anticipated.

The nearer view was desolation simmering in the heat. A hundred yards away, on
the opposite bank of the wash, the forlorn ruins of a cabin or two gave
melancholy evidence that here men had once worked and laughed and
loved--perchance. He looked at the furnace yawning beside him, and at the
muddy water swirling in drunken haste just below. It might have been just here
that his grandfather had landed from the steamboat _Gila_ and had watched the
lovely young half-breed girl in the crowd come to welcome the boat and
passengers.

He started when Johnny Buffalo spoke at his elbow. How the Indian had reached
that spot unheard and unseen Rawley did not know. Johnny Buffalo was pointing
to the north.

“I think that high mountain is where we must go,” he said. “It is one day’s
travel. We can go to-day when the sun is behind the mountains, and we can walk
until the stars are here. Very early in the morning we can walk again, and
before it is too hot we can reach the trees where it will be cool.”

“We have a lot of grub and things in the car,” Rawley objected. “It seems to
me that it wouldn’t be a bad plan to carry the stuff up here and cache it
somewhere in this old mill. Then if your friend Queo should show up, there
won’t be so much for him to steal. And if we want to make a camp on the
mountain, we can come down here and carry the stuff up as we need it. There’s
a hundred dollars’ worth of outfit in that car, Johnny,” he added frugally.
“I’m all for keeping it for ourselves.”

Johnny Buffalo looked at the mountain, and he looked down at the car,--and
then grunted a reluctant acquiescence. Rawley laughed at him.

“That’s all right--the mountain won’t run away over night,” he bantered,
slapping his hand down on Johnny Buffalo’s shoulder with an affectionate
familiarity bred in the past month. “I’ve been juggling that car over the
desert trails since sunrise, and I wouldn’t object to taking it easy for a few
hours.”

Johnny Buffalo said no more but began helping to unload the car. It was he who
chose the trail by which they carried the loads to the upper level,
cement-floored, where no tracks would show. He chose a hiding place beneath
the wreckage of some machinery that had fallen against the bank in such a way
that an open space was left beneath, large enough to hold their outfit.

A huge rattlesnake protested stridently against being disturbed. Rawley drew
his automatic, meaning to shoot it; but Johnny Buffalo stopped him with a
warning gesture, and himself killed the snake with a rock. While it was still
writhing with a smashed head, he picked it up by the tail, took a long step or
two and heaved it into the river, grinning his satisfaction over a deed well
done.

Rawley, standing back watching him, had a swift vision of the old Indian
paddling solemnly about the yard near the west wing. There he was an
incongruous figure amongst the syringas and the roses. Here, although he had
discarded the showy fringed buckskin for the orthodox brown khaki clothes of
the desert, he somehow fitted into his surroundings and became a part of the
wilderness itself. Johnny Buffalo was assuredly coming into his own.




CHAPTER SIX

TRAILS MEET


By sunrise they were ready for the trail, light packs and filled canteens
slung upon their shoulders. The car was backed against the bluff that would
shade it from the scorching sunlight from early afternoon to sundown. Beside
it were the embers of a mesquite-wood fire where they had boiled coffee and
fried bacon in the cool of dawn. As a safeguard against the loss of his car,
Rawley had disconnected the breaker points from the distributor and carried
them, carefully wrapped, in his pocket. There would be no moving of the car
under its own power until the points were replaced. And Johnny Buffalo had
advised leaving a few things in the car, to ward off suspicion that their
outfit had been cached. Furthermore, he had cunningly obliterated their tracks
through the deep, fine sand to the ruins of the stamp mill. Even the keen,
predatory eyes of an outlaw Indian could scarcely distinguish any trace of
their many trips that way.

They crossed the wash, turned into the remnant of an old road leading up the
bank to the level above, and followed a trail up the river. Once Johnny
Buffalo stopped and pointed down the bank.

“The ferryboat went there,” he explained. “Much land has been eaten by the
river since last I saw this place. Many houses stood here. They are gone. All
is gone. My people are gone, like the town. Of Queo only have I heard, and him
the white men hunt as they hunt the wolf.”

Rawley nodded, having no words for what he felt. There was something
inexpressibly melancholy in this desolation where his grandfather had found
riotous life. Of the fortunes gathered here, the fortunes lost--of the hopes
fulfilled and the hopes crushed slowly in long, monotonous days of toil and
disappointment--what man could tell? Only the river, rushing heedlessly past
as it had hurried, all those years ago, to meet the lumbering little river
boats struggling against its current with their burden of human emotions, only
the river might have told how the town was born,--and how it had died. Or the
grim hills standing there as they had stood since the land was in the making,
looking down with saturnine calm upon the puny endeavors of men whose lives
would soon enough cease upon earth and be forgotten. Rawley’s boot toe struck
against something in the loose gravel,--a child’s shoe with the toe worn to a
gaping mouth, the heel worn down to the last on the outer edge: dry as a
bleached bone, warped by many a storm, blackened, doleful. Even a young man
setting out in quest of his fortune, with a picturesque secret code in his
pocket, may be forgiven for sending a thought after the child who had scuffed
that coarse little shoe down here in El Dorado.

But presently Johnny Buffalo, leading the way briskly, his sharp old eyes
taking in everything within their range as if he were eagerly verifying his
memories of the place, turned from the trail along the river and entered the
hills. His moccasined feet clung tenaciously to the steep places where
Rawley’s high-laced mining boots slipped. The sun rays struck them fiercely
and the “little stinging gnats” which Grandfather King had mentioned in his
diary were there to pester them, poising vibrantly just before the eyes as if
they waited only the opportunity to dart between the lids.

The thought that perhaps his grandfather had come that way, fifty years ago,
filled the toil of climbing up the long gully with a peculiar interest. Fifty
years ago these hills must have looked much the same. Fifty years ago, the
prospect holes they passed occasionally may have been fresh-turned earth and
rocks. Men searching for rich silver and gold might have been seen plodding
along the hillsides; but the hills themselves could not have changed much. His
grandfather had looked upon all this, and had divided his thoughts, perhaps,
between the gold and his latest infatuation, the half-breed girl, Anita. And
suddenly Rawley put a vague speculation into words:

“Hey, Johnny! Here’s a good place to make a smoke, in the shade.” He waited
until the Indian had retraced the dozen steps between them. “Johnny, there was
a beautiful half-breed girl here, when Grandfather made his last trip up the
river. She was half Spanish. My grandfather mentioned her once or twice in his
diary. Do you remember her?”

“There were many beautiful girls in my tribe,” Johnny Buffalo retorted drily.
“What name did he call her?”

“Anita. It’s a pretty name, and it proves the Spanish, I should say.”

The old man stared at the opposite slope. His mouth grew thin-lipped and
stern.

“My uncle, the chief, was betrayed in his old age. His youngest squaw loved a
Spanish man with noble look. I have the tale from my older brothers, who told
me. The child she bore was the child of the Spanish gentleman. My uncle’s
youngest squaw--died.” Johnny Buffalo paused significantly. “The child was
given to my mother to keep. Her name was Anita. She was very beautiful. I
remember. Many visits Anita made with friends near this place. I think she is
the same. It was not good for my sergeant to look upon her with love. I have
heard my brothers whisper that Anita looked with soft eyes upon the white
soldiers.”

Rawley’s young sympathies suffered a definite revulsion. If his grandfather’s
_dulce corazon_ were a coquette, her fruitless waiting for his return was not
so beautifully tragic after all. There were other white soldiers stationed
along the river, Rawley remembered, with a curl of the lip. His romantic
imagination had not balked at the savage blood in her veins, since she was a
beauty of fifty years ago. But he was a sturdy-souled youth with very
old-fashioned notions concerning virtue. He finished his smoke and went on,
feeling cheated by the cold facts he had almost forced from Johnny Buffalo.

They reached the head of that gulch, climbed a steep, high ridge where they
must use hands as well as feet in the climbing, and dug heels into the earth
in a descent even steeper. Rawley told himself once that he would just as soon
start out to follow a crow through this country as to follow Johnny Buffalo.
One word had evidently been omitted from the Indian’s English education by
Grandfather King,--the word “detour.” Rawley thought of the straight-forward
march of locusts he had once read about and wondered if Johnny Buffalo had
taken lessons from them in his youth.

However, he consoled himself with the thought that a straight line to the
mountain would undoubtedly shorten the distance. If the Indian could climb
sneer walls of rock like a lizard, Rawley would attempt to follow. And they
would ultimately arrive at their destination, though the glimpse he had
obtained of the mountain from the ridge they had just crossed failed to
confirm Johnny Buffalo’s assertion that it was one day’s travel. They had been
walking three hours by Rawley’s watch, and the mountain looked even farther
away than from El Dorado. But Johnny Buffalo was so evidently enjoying every
minute of the hike through his native hills that Rawley could not bear to
spoil his pleasure by even hinting that he was blazing a mighty rough trail.

They were working up another tortuous ravine where not even Johnny Buffalo
could always keep a straight line by the sun. In places the walls overhung the
gulch in shelving, weather-worn cliffs of soft limestone. Bowlders washed down
from the heights made slow going, because they were half the time climbing
over or around some huge obstruction; and because of the rattlesnakes they
must look well where a hand or a foot was laid. Johnny Buffalo was still in
the lead; and Rawley, for all his youth and splendid stamina was not finding
the Indian too slow a pacemaker. Indeed, he was perfectly satisfied when the
dozen feet between them did not lengthen to fifteen or twenty.

The mounting sun made the heat in that gully a terrific thing to endure. But
the Indian did not lift the canteen to his mouth; nor did Rawley. Both had
learned the foolishness of drinking too freely at the beginning of a journey.
So, when Johnny Buffalo stopped suddenly in the act of passing around a
jutting ledge, Rawley halted in his tracks and waited to see what was the
reason.

The Indian glanced back at him and crooked a forefinger. Rawley set one foot
carefully between two rocks, planted the other as circumspectly, and so,
without a sound, stole up to Johnny Buffalo’s side. Johnny waited until their
shoulders touched then leaned forward and pointed.

Up on the ridge a couple of hundred yards before them, a man moved crouching
behind a bush, came into the open, bent lower and peered downward. His actions
were stealthy; his whole manner inexpressibly furtive. His back was toward
them, and the ridge itself hid the thing he was stalking.

“He’s after a deer, maybe. Or a mountain sheep,” Rawley whispered, when the
man laid a rifle across a rock and settled lower on his haunches.

“Still, it is well that we see what he sees,” Johnny Buffalo whispered back.
“We will stalk him as he stalks his kill.”

The Indian squirmed his shoulder out of the strap sling that held his rifle in
its case behind him. With seeming deliberation, yet with speed he uncased the
weapon, worked the lever gently to make sure the gun was chamber loaded, and
motioned Rawley to follow him.

In the hills the old man had somehow slipped into the leadership, and now
Rawley obeyed him without a word. They stole up the side of the gulch where
the man on the ridge could not discover them without turning completely
around; which would destroy his position beside the rock and risk the loss of
a shot at his game. He seemed wholly absorbed in watching something on the
farther side of the ridge, and it did not seem likely that he would hear them.

A little farther up, a ledge cutting across the head of the gulch hid him
completely from the two. An impulse seized Rawley to cross the gulch there and
to climb the ridge farther on, nearer the spot which the man had seemed to be
watching. He caught the attention of Johnny Buffalo, whispered to him his
desire, and received a nod of understanding and consent. Johnny would keep
straight on, and so come up behind the fellow.

Unaccountably, Rawley wanted to hurry. He wanted to see the man’s quarry
before a shot was fired. So, when a wrinkle in the ridge made easy climbing
and afforded concealment, he went up a tiny gully, digging in his toes and
trying to keep in the soft ground so that sliding rocks could not betray him.

Unexpectedly the deep wrinkle brought him up to a notch in the ridge, beyond
which another gully led steeply downward. Immediately beneath him a narrow
trail wound sinuously, climbing just beyond around the point of another hill.
He could not see the man up on the ridge, but he could not doubt that the
rifle was aimed at some point along this trail. He was standing on a rock,
reconnoitering and expecting every moment to hear a shot, when the
unmistakable sound of voices came up to him from somewhere below. He listened,
his glance going from the ridge to the bit of trail that showed farther away
on the point of the opposite hill. The thought flashed through his mind that
the man with the rifle could easily have seen persons coming around that
point; that he must be lying in wait. Whoever it was coming, they must pass
along the trail directly beneath the watcher on the ridge. It would be an easy
rifle shot; a matter of no more than a hundred yards downhill.

He stepped down off the rock and started running down the steep gully to the
trail. He was, he judged, fully a hundred yards up the trail from where the
man was watching above. He did not know who was coming; it did not matter. It
was an ambush, and he meant to spoil it. So he came hurtling down the steep
declivity, the lower third of which was steeper than he suspected. Had he made
an appointment with the travelers to meet them at that spot, he could not
possibly have kept it more punctually. For he slid down a ten-foot bank of
loose earth and arrived sitting upright in the trail immediately under the
nose of a bald-faced burro with a distended pack half covering it from sight.

There was no time for ceremony. Rawley flung up his arms and shooed the
astonished animal back against another burro, so precipitately that he crowded
it completely off the trail and down the steep bank. Rawley heard the sullen
thud of the landing as he scrambled to his knees, glancing apprehensively over
his shoulder as he did so. There had been no shot fired, but he could not be
certain that the small flurry in the trail had been unobserved.

“Get back, around the turn!” he commanded guardedly and drove before him the
two women who had been walking behind the burros.

The first, a fat old squaw with gray bangs hanging straight down to her
eyebrows, scuttled for cover, the lead burro crowding past her and neatly
overturning her in the trail. But a slim girl in khaki breeches and high-laced
boots stood her ground, eyeing him with a slight frown from under a light gray
Stetson hat.

“Get back, I say! A man on the ridge is watching this trail with a rifle
across a rock. It may be Queo--get back!” He did not stop with words. He took
the girl by the arm and bustled her forcibly around the sharp kink in the
trail that would, he hoped, effectually hide them from the ridge.

“Are you quite insane?” The girl twitched her arm out of his grasp. “Or is
this a joke you are perpetrating on the natives? I must say I fail to see the
humor of it.”

“Climb that gully to the top and sneak along the ridge a couple of hundred
yards, and you will see the point of the joke,” Rawley retorted with an access
of dignity, perhaps to cover the extreme informality of his arrival.

“And why should any one--even Queo--want to shoot us?” True to her sex, the
girl was refusing to abdicate her first position in the matter.

“How should I know? He may not be watching for you, particularly. From the
ridge he probably saw your pack train around the turn above here, and he may
have thought you were prospectors. I don’t know; I’m only guessing. What I do
know is what I saw: a man with a rifle laid across a rock, up there, watching
this trail. It may not be you he’s after; but I wouldn’t deliberately walk
into range just to find out.”

“What would you do, then? Stay here forever?”

“Until my partner and I eliminate the risk, you’d better stay here.” Rawley’s
tone was masterful. “I only came down to warn whoever was coming--walking into
an ambush.”

The girl eyed him speculatively, with an exasperating little smile. “It all
sounds very thrilling; very tenderfooty indeed. And in the meantime, there’s
poor old Deacon down there on his back in the ditch. Do you always--er--arrive
like that?”

Rawley turned his back on her indignantly and discovered the old squaw sitting
solidly where the lead burro had placed her. She was very fat, and she filled
that portion of the trail which she occupied. The red bandana was pushed back
on her head, and her gray curtain of bangs was parted rakishly on one side.
She was staring at Rawley fixedly, a look of terror in her eyes.

He went to her, meaning to help her up. Now that he recalled that first
panicky moment, he remembered that the burro had deposited her with some force
in her present position. She might be hurt.

But the old squaw put up her hands before her, palms out to ward him off. She
cried out, a shrill expostulation in her own tongue which caused the girl to
swing round quickly and hurry toward her.

“No, no! He isn’t a ghost! Whatever made you think of such a thing? He doesn’t
mean to harm you--no, he is _not_ a spirit. He merely fell down hill, and he
wants to help you up. Are you hurt--Grandmother?” Her clear, gray-brown eyes
went quickly, defiantly to Rawley’s face.

That young man could not repress a startled look, which traveled from the slim
girl, indubitably white, to the squaw whimpering in the trail. She must be
trying her own hand at a joke, he thought, just to break even with his fancied
presumption in halting their leisurely progress down the trail.

From up on the ridge a rifle cracked. The three turned heads toward the thin,
sinister report. They waited motionless for a moment. Then the girl spoke.

“That wasn’t fired in our direction,” she said, and immediately there came the
sound of another shot. “And that’s not the same gun,” she added. “That sounds
like an old-fashioned gun shooting black powder. Didn’t you hear the _pow-w_
of it?”

“That would be Johnny Buffalo--my Indian partner,” said Rawley. “You folks
stay here. I’m going back up there and see what’s doing.”

“Is that necessary?” The girl looked at him quickly. “I think you ought to
help turn Deacon right side up before you go.” She leaned sidewise and peered
down over the bank. “He’s in an awful mess. His pack is wedged between two
bowlders, and his legs are sticking straight up in the air.”

Rawley sent a hasty glance down the bank. “He’s all right--he’s flopping his
ears,” he observed reassuringly. “I’ll be back just as soon as I see how
Johnny Buffalo is making out. That fellow may have got him. You stay back here
out of sight. Promise me.” He looked at her earnestly, as if by the force of
his will he would compel obedience.

Her eyes evaded the meeting. “Pickles will have to be rounded up,” she said.
“He’s probably halfway to Nelson by this time. And there’s Grandmother to
think of.”

“Well, you think of those things until I get back,” he said, with a swift
smile. “I can’t leave my partner to shoot it out alone.”




CHAPTER SEVEN

NEVADA


He ran to the point of rocks, gathered himself together and cleared the trail
and the open space beyond in one leap. How he got up the steep bank he never
remembered afterward. He only knew that he heard the sharp crack of the first
rifle again as he was sprinting up the little gully that had concealed his
descent. He gained the top, stopped to get his bearings more accurately and
made his way toward the spot where he had seen the man with the rifle.

It occurred to him that he had best approach the spot from the shelter of the
ledge where he had separated from Johnny Buffalo. At that point he could pick
up the Indian’s tracks and follow them, so saving time in the long run.

Johnny Buffalo’s moccasins left little trace in the gravelly soil. But here
and there they left a mark, and Rawley got the direction and hurried on. Fifty
yards farther up the ridge he glimpsed something yellowish-brown against a
small juniper. A few feet farther, he saw that it was Johnny Buffalo, lying on
his face, one arm thrown outward with the hand still grasping the stock of his
rifle.

He snatched up the rifle, crouched beside the Indian and searched the
neighborhood with his eyes, trying to get a sight of the killer. In a moment
he spied him, away down the deep ravine up which he and Johnny Buffalo had
toiled not half an hour before. The man was running. Rawley raised the rifle
to his shoulder, took careful aim and fired, but he had small hope of hitting
his target at that distance.

At the sound of the shot so close above him, Johnny Buffalo stirred uneasily,
as if disturbed in his sleep. The man in the distance ducked out of sight
amongst the bowlders; and that was the last Rawley saw of him at that time.

“I must apologize for not taking you more seriously when you warned me,” said
the girl, just behind him. “Is this--?”

“My partner, Johnny Buffalo. He isn’t dead--he moved, just now--but I’m afraid
he’s badly hurt.” Rawley lifted anxious blue eyes to her face.

“We can carry him down to the trail. Then, if Deacon is all right when we get
him up, we can put your partner on him and pack him home. It’s only a mile or
so.”

“It might be better to take him to Nelson,” Rawley amended the suggestion. “I
could get a car there and take him on to Las Vegas, probably. Or some mine
will have a doctor.”

“It’s farther--and the heat, with the long ride, would probably finish him,”
the girl pointed out bluntly. “On the other hand, a mile on the burro will get
him home, where it’s cool and we can see how badly he’s hurt. And then, if he
needs hospital care, Uncle Peter can take him down to Needles in the launch,
this evening when it’s cool. I really don’t mean to be disagreeable and
argumentative, but it seems to me that will be much the more comfortable plan
for him. And I can’t help feeling responsible, in a way. I suppose he was
trying to protect us, when he was shot.”

Rawley looked up from an amateurish examination of the old man. The bullet
wound was in the shoulder, and he was hoping that it was high enough so that
the lung was not injured. His flask of brandy, placed at Johnny’s lips,
brought a gulp and a gasp. The black eyes opened, looked from Rawley to the
girl and closed again.

“There! I believe he’s going to be all right,” the girl declared
optimistically. “I’ll take his feet, and you carry his shoulders. When we get
him down to the trail, I’ll have Grandmother look after him until we get the
burros straightened out. Queo--or whoever it was--did you see him?”

Rawley waved a hand toward the rocky ravine. “You heard me shoot,” he reminded
her. “Missed him--with that heirloom Johnny carries. He was running like a
jackrabbit when I saw him last. Well, I think you’re right--but I hate to
trouble you folks. Though I’d trouble the president himself, for Johnny
Buffalo’s sake.”

“It’s a strange name,” she remarked irrelevantly, stooping and making ready to
lift his knees. “He must be a Northern Indian.”

“Born in this district,” Rawley told her. “Grandfather found him in the desert
when he was a kid. I suppose he gave him the name--regardless.”

Until they reached the trail there was no further talk, their breath being
needed for something more important. They laid the injured man down in the
shade of a greasewood, and the girl immediately left to bring the old squaw.
She was no sooner gone than Johnny Buffalo opened his eyes.

“It was Queo,” he said, huskily whispering. “I thought he was shooting at you.
I tried to kill him. But the damn gun is old--old. It struck me hard. I did
not shoot straight. I did not kill him. Queo looked, he saw me and he shot as
he ran away. The gun has killed many--but I am old--”

“You’re all right,” Rawley interrupted. “Quit blaming yourself. You saved two
women by shooting when you did. Queo was afraid to stay and shoot again when
he knew there was a gun at his back. He has gone down the ravine where we came
up.”

“Who was the white girl?” Even Johnny Buffalo betrayed a very masculine
interest, Rawley observed, grinning inwardly. But he only said:

“I don’t know. She was on the trail, with an old squaw and two burros. It was
they that Queo was laying for, evidently. Don’t try to talk any more, till I
get you where we can look after you properly. Where’s your pack? I didn’t see
it, up there.”

“It is hidden in the juniper. I did not want to fight with a load on my back.”

“All right. Don’t talk any more. We’ll fix you up, all fine as silk.”

The girl was returning, and after her waddled the squaw, reluctant, looking
ready to retreat at the first suspicious move. Rawley stood aside while the
girl gave her brief directions in Indian,--so that Johnny Buffalo could
understand, Rawley shrewdly suspected, and thanked her with his eyes. The
squaw sidled past Rawley and sat down on the bank, still staring at him
fixedly. His abrupt appearance and the consequent stampede of the burros had
evidently impressed her unfavorably. The look she bestowed upon Johnny Buffalo
was more casual. He was an Indian and therefore understandable, it seemed.

The narrow canyon lay sun-baked and peaceful to the hard blue of the sky. With
the lightness which came of removing the pack from his shoulders, Rawley
walked up the trail and around the turn to where the burro called Deacon still
lay patiently on his back in the narrow watercourse below the trail. He slid
down the bank and inspected the lashings of the pack.

“We use what is called the squaw hitch,” the girl informed him from the trail
just above his head. “If you cut that forward rope I think you can loosen the
whole thing. The knot is on top of the pack, and of course Deacon’s lying on
it.” A moment later she added, “I’ll go after Pickles, unless I can be of some
use to you.”

Privately, Rawley thought that she was useful as a relief to the eyes, if
nothing else. But he told her that he could get along all right, and let her
go. The girl piqued his interest; she was undoubtedly beautiful, with her
slim, erect figure, her clear, hazel eyes with straight eyebrows, heavy
lashes, and her lips that were firm for all their soft curves. But Johnny
Buffalo’s life might be hanging on Rawley’s haste. However beautiful, however
much she might attract his interest, no girl could tempt him from the chief
issue.

By the time she returned with Pickles, Rawley had retrieved Deacon and was
gone down the trail with him. She came up in time to help him lift Johnny
Buffalo on the burro and tie him there with the pack rope. She was efficient
as a man, and almost as strong, Rawley observed. And although she treated the
squaw with careful deference, she was plainly the head of their little
expedition,--and the shoulders and the brains.

Only once did the squaw speak on the way to the river. The girl was walking
alongside Deacon, steadying Johnny Buffalo on that side while Rawley held the
other. They were talking easily now, of impersonal things; and when, on a
short climb, the burro stepped sharply to one side and Johnny Buffalo lurched
toward the girl, Rawley slipped his arm farther behind the Indian. His fingers
clasped for an instant the girl’s hand. The squaw, walking heavily behind, saw
the brief contact.

“Nevada! You shall not be so bold,” she cried in Pahute. “Take away your hand
from the white man.”

The girl turned her head and answered sharply in the same tongue and
afterwards smiled across at Rawley, meeting his eyes with perfect frankness.

“Yes, my name is Nevada. I’ll save you the trouble of asking,” she said
calmly. “El Dorado Nevada Macalister, if you want it all at once. Luckily, no
one ever attempts to call me all of it. My parents were loyal, romantic, and
had an ear for euphony.”

“Were?” The small impertinence slipped out in spite of Rawley; but fortunately
she did not seem to mind.

“Yes. My father was caught in a cave-in in the Quartette Mine when I was a
baby. Mother died when I was six. I have a beautiful, impractical name--and
not much else--to remember them by. I’ve lived with Grandfather and
Grandmother; except, of course, what time I have been in school.” She gave him
another quick look behind Johnny Buffalo’s back. “And your autobiography?”

“Mine is more simple and not so interesting. Name, George Rawlins King. Place
of birth, a suburb of St. Louis. Occupation, mining engineer. Present
avocation, prospecting during my vacation. My idea of play, you see, is to get
out here in the heat and snakes and work at my trade--for myself.”

“And Johnny Buffalo?”

“Oh, he just came along. Hadn’t seen this country since he was a kid and
wanted to get back, I suppose, on his old stamping ground. He lived with
Grandfather. But Grandfather died a few weeks ago, and Johnny and I have sort
of thrown in together. Now, I suppose our prospecting trip is all off--for the
present, anyway.”

“This country has been gone over with a microscope, almost,” said Nevada. “I
suppose there is mineral in these hills yet, but it must be pretty well
hidden. The country used to swarm with prospectors, but they seem to have got
disgusted and quit. The war in Europe, of course, has created a market--” She
stopped and laughed with chagrin. “Of course a lady desert rat like me can
give a mining engineer valuable information concerning markets and economic
conditions in general!”

“I’m always glad to talk shop,” Rawley declared tactfully.

But Nevada fell silent and would not talk at all during the remainder of the
journey.




CHAPTER EIGHT

“HIM THAT IS--MINE ENEMY”


Their progress was necessarily slow, and Nevada’s “mile or so” seemed longer.
Johnny Buffalo remained no more than half-conscious and breathed painfully.
Nevada invented a makeshift sunshade for him, breaking off and trimming a
drooping greasewood branch and borrowing the squaw’s apron to spread over it.
This Rawley held awkwardly with one hand while he steadied the swaying figure
with the other, and so they came at last abruptly to the river he had left at
sunrise.

The trail dipped down steeply to a small basin that overlooked the river
possibly a hundred feet below. The canyon walls rose bold and black
beyond,--sheer crags of rock with here and there a brush-filled crevice.
Around the barren rim of the basin two or three crude shacks were set within
easy calling distance of one another, and three or four swarthy, unkempt
children accompanied by nondescript dogs rushed forth to greet the newcomers.

The old squaw waddled forward and drove the dogs from the heels of the burro
called Pickles, which lashed out and sent one cur yelping to the nearest
shack. The children halted abruptly and stared at the two strangers
open-mouthed, retreating slowly backward, unwilling to lose sight of them for
an instant.

Rawley stole a glance at Nevada, just turning his eyes under his heavy-lashed
lids. A furtive look directed at his face was intercepted, and the red
suffused her cheeks. Then her head lifted proudly.

“My uncle’s children are not accustomed to seeing people,” she explained
evenly. “Strangers seldom come here, and the children have never been away
from home. Please forgive their bad manners.”

“Kids are honest in their manners,” Rawley replied, “and that’s more than
grown-ups can say. I reckon these youngsters wonder what the deuce has been
taking place. I’d want an eyeful, myself, if I were in their places.”

Nevada did not answer but led the way past the shacks, which did not look
particularly inviting, to a rock-faced building with screened porch that faced
the river, its back pushed deep into the hill behind it. Rawley gave her a
grateful glance. He did not need to be told that this was the quietest,
coolest place in the basin.

“We’ll make him as comfortable as we can, and I’ll send for Uncle Peter,” she
said, as they stopped before the door. She called to the oldest of the
children, a boy, and spoke to him rapidly in Indian. It seemed to Rawley that
she was purposely emphasizing her bizarre relationship.

A younger squaw--or so she looked to be--came from a shack, a fat, solemn-eyed
baby riding her hip. Her hair was wound somehow on top of her head and held
there insecurely with hairpins half falling out and cheap, glisteny side
combs. A second glance convinced Rawley that she had white man’s blood in her
veins, but her predominant traits were Indian, he judged; except that she
lacked the Indian aloofness.

“Mr. King, this is my Aunt Gladys--Mrs. Cramer,” Nevada announced distinctly.
“Aunt Gladys, Queo shot Mr. King’s partner, who had discovered him lying in
wait for Grandmother and me and was trying to protect us. Mr. King ran down to
the trail to warn us, while his partner crept up behind Queo. He fired, after
Queo had shot at us, but he thinks he missed altogether. At any rate Queo shot
him. So Grandmother and I brought him on home. He saved our lives, and we must
try to save his.”

Aunt Gladys ducked her unkempt head, grinned awkwardly at Rawley, who lifted
his hat to her--and thereby embarrassed her the more--and hitched the baby
into a new position on her hip.

“Whadda yuh think ol’ Jess’ll say?” she asked, in an undertone. “My, ain’t it
awful, the way that Queo is acting up? Is there anything I can do? It won’t
take but a few minutes to start a fire and heat water.”

They had eased Johnny Buffalo from the burro’s back to the broad doorstep,
which was shaded by the wide eaves of the porch. Now they were preparing to
carry him in, feet first so that Nevada could lead the way. She turned her
head and nodded approval of the suggestion. So Aunt Gladys, after lingering to
watch the wounded man’s removal, departed to her own shack, shooing her
progeny before her.

Rawley had never had much experience with wounds, but he went to work as
carefully as possible, getting the old man to bed and ready for ministrations
more expert than his. In a few minutes Nevada came with a basin of water that
smelled of antiseptic. Very matter-of-factly she helped him wash the wound.

“I think that is as much as we can do until Uncle Peter comes,” she said when
they had finished. “He’s the one who always looks after hurts in the family.”
She left the room and did not return again.

With nothing to do but sit beside the bed, Rawley found himself dwelling
rather intently upon the strangeness of the situation. From the name spoken by
Nevada, he knew that he must be in the camp of the enemy. At least, Jess
Cramer was the name of Grandfather’s rival who figured unfortunately in that
Fourth of July fight away back in ’66, and there was furthermore the warning
of the code, “Take heed now ... on the hillside ... which is upon the bank of
the river ... in the wilderness ... ye shall find ... him that ... is mine
enemy.” Rawley had certainly not expected that the enemy would be Jess Cramer,
but it might be so.

He was repeating to himself that other warning, “He that keepeth his mouth
keepeth his life,” when Nevada’s voice outside brought his attention back to
the immediate exigencies of the case. He had already told her his name--she
had repeated it to that flat-faced, hopelessly uninteresting “Aunt Gladys.”
Nevada had taken particular pains, he remembered, to tell her aunt all about
the mishap and to stress the service which he and Johnny Buffalo had rendered
her and her grandmother. Was it because she wished to have some one beside
herself who was well-disposed toward them? Partly that, he guessed, and partly
because the easiest way to forestall curiosity is to give a full explanation
at once. In Nevada’s rapid-fire account of the shooting, Rawley fancied that
he had unconsciously been given a key to the situation and to the disposition
of Aunt Gladys. He grinned while he filled his pipe and waited.

Presently the deep, masculine voice he had heard outside talking with Nevada
ceased, and a firm, measured tread was heard on the porch. A big man paused
for a few seconds in the doorway and then came forward; a man as tall as
Rawley, as broad of shoulder, as narrow hipped. He was dressed much as Rawley
was dressed, except that his shirt was of cheaper, darker material and the
breeches were earth-stained and old, as were his boots. He carried his head
well up and looked down at Rawley calmly, appraisingly, with neither dislike
nor favor in his face. He was smooth-shaven, and his jaw was square, his lips
firm and somewhat bitter. Rawley rose and bowed and stood back from the bed.

“My niece has told me all about the shooting,” he said, moving toward the bed.
“I’m not a doctor, but I’ve had some experience with wounds. In this country
we have to learn to take care of ourselves. Is your partner unconscious?”

“Dopey, I’d say. I can rouse him, but it seemed best to let him be as quiet as
possible. He had over an hour in the heat, and the joggling on the burro
didn’t do him any good, I imagine.” Rawley hoped Uncle Peter would not think
he was staring like an idiot, but he could not rid himself of the feeling that
somewhere, some time, he had seen this man before.

Uncle Peter bent and examined the wound. When he moved Johnny Buffalo a bit,
the Indian opened his eyes and stared hard into his face.

“My sergeant! I did not think to--”

“Out of his head,” Rawley muttered uneasily. “It’s the first symptom of it
he’s shown.”

Johnny Buffalo muttered again, pressed his lips together and closed his eyes.
After that he did not speak, or give any sign that he heard, though Uncle
Peter was talking all the while he dressed the wound.

“It’s going to take some time,” he said. “The bullet broke his shoulder blade,
but if the lung is touched at all it was barely grazed. Nevada spoke of my
taking him down the river to Needles, but it can’t be done. The engine in the
launch is useless until I can get a new connecting rod and another part or
two.” He stared down at Johnny Buffalo, frowning.

“Well, from all accounts the two of you saved the women’s lives to-day,” he
said, after a minute of studying over the situation. “Queo was after the grub,
probably--and he’s no particular love for any of us. He undoubtedly knew who
was coming down the trail--he may have watched them go up, just about
daybreak. Common gratitude gives the orders, in this case. You can stay here
until this man is well enough to ride, or until I can take you to Needles.”

A little more of harshness and his tone would have been grudging. Rawley
flushed at the implied reluctance of the offered hospitality.

“It’s mighty good of you, but we don’t want to impose on any one,” he said
stiffly. “If he can stay for a day or two, I can get out to Needles and bring
up a boat of some kind. It’s the only thing I can think of--but I can make it
in a couple of days.”

The other turned and regarded him much as Nevada had first done, with a
mixture of defiance and pride. His jaw squared, the lines beside his mouth
grew more bitter.

“We may be breeds--but we aren’t brutes,” he said harshly. “You’ll stay where
you are and take care of your partner. The burden of nursing him can’t fall on
the women.” He stopped and seemed debating something within himself. “We’ve no
reason to open our arms to outsiders,” he added finally. “If folks let us
alone, we let them alone--and glad to do it. Father’s touchy about having
strangers in camp. But all rules must be broken once, they say.”

“I think you’re over-sensitive,” Rawley told him bluntly. “You’re
self-conscious over something no one else would think of twice. It’s--”

“Oh, I know. You needn’t say it. Sounds pretty, but it isn’t worth a damn when
you try to put it in practice. Well, let it drop. I’ll send over some medicine
to keep his fever down, and the rest is pretty much up to nature and the care
you give him. It’s cool here--that’s a great deal.”

“We’ll be turning out your niece, though, I’m afraid. I can’t do that.” For
the first time Rawley was keenly conscious of the incongruity of his
surroundings. Here in a settlement of Indians (he could scarcely put it more
mildly, with the dogs and the frowsy papooses and the two squaws for evidence)
one little oasis of civilized furnishings spoke eloquently of the white blood
warring against the red. The room was furnished cheaply, it is true, and much
of the furniture was homemade; but for all its simplicity there was not one
false note anywhere, not one tawdry adornment. It was like the girl
herself,--simple, clean-cut, dignified.

“My niece won’t mind. I shall give her my own dugout, which is as comfortable
as this. I can find plenty of room to stretch out. Hard work makes a soft
bed.” He smiled briefly. Again Rawley was struck with a sense of familiarity,
of having known Uncle Peter somewhere before.

But before he could put the question the man was gone, and Johnny Buffalo was
looking at him gravely. But he did not speak, and presently his eyes closed.
After that, the medicine was handed in by a bashful, beady-eyed boy who showed
white teeth and scudded away, kicking up hot dust with his bare feet as he
ran.

After all, what did it matter? A chance meeting in some near-by town and
afterwards forgetfulness. Uncle Peter evidently did not remember him, so the
meeting must have been brief and unimportant.




CHAPTER NINE

“A PLEASANT TRIP TO YOU!”


Rawley chanced to look out of the window. He muttered something then and
strode to the screened door.

“Hey! You aren’t going back up that trail, surely?” He went out hurriedly and
took long steps after Nevada.

The girl turned and looked at him over her shoulder, flinging back a heavy
braid of coppery auburn hair. She had Pickles by his lead rope and was plainly
heading into the trail to Nelson.

“Why, yes. There’s a load of grub beside the trail where Deacon upset. I’m
going after it.”

Rawley rushed back, seized his hat, sent an anxious glance toward the bed and
then ran. He overtook Nevada just at the edge of the basin and stopped her by
the simple method of stopping the burro with a strong hand.

“You go back and sit beside Johnny,” he commanded. “I’ll get that grub,
myself. And if you’ve got a rifle, I’d like to borrow it.”

“That’s utter nonsense--your going,” Nevada exclaimed. “I meant to take one of
the boys--I just sent him in to wash his face, first.”

Rawley laughed. “Do you think a clean face on a kid will have any effect on
Queo? You’ll both stay at home, please. I’m going.”

“If you’re determined, I can’t very well stop you,” she said coldly. “But I
certainly am going. I always do these things. There’s no possible reason--”

Rawley looked over at the nearest shack, where Aunt Gladys stood watching
them, the baby still on her hip. “Mrs. Cramer, I am going up after the grub we
left by the trail. Will you see that Johnny Buffalo is looked after? And will
you call Miss Macalister’s grandmother, or whoever has any authority over
her?” His voice was stern, but the twinkle in his eyes belied the tone.

Aunt Gladys giggled and hitched the baby up from its sagging position. “There
ain’t nobody but Peter can do nothing with Nevada,” she informed him. “Her
gran’paw, maybe--but he don’t pay no attention half the time. You better stay
home, Nevada. Queo might shoot you.”

“How perfectly idiotic! Do you suppose he would refrain from shooting Mr.
King, but kill me instead?”

“Well, you can’t tell what he might do,” Aunt Gladys observed sagely. “He’s
crazy in the head.”

Rawley laid his fingers on Nevada’s hand, where she held Pickles by the
bridle. He looked straight into her eyes, bright with anger. His own eyes
pleaded with her.

“Miss Macalister, please don’t be obstinate. To let you go back up that trail
is unthinkable. I am going, and some one must be with my partner. I can make
the trip well under two hours; there is heavy stuff in that ditch which needs
a man’s shoulder under it, getting it back into the trail. Please stay with
Johnny Buffalo, won’t you?”

Nevada hesitated, staring back into his eyes. Her hand slid reluctantly from
the bridle. Her lip curled at one corner, though her cheeks flushed
contradictorily.

“Masculine superiority asserts itself,” she drawled. “Since I can’t prevent
your going, I think, after all, I shall prefer to stay at home. A pleasant
trip to you, Mr. King!”

“Thanks for those kind words,” Rawley cried, his voice as mocking as hers.
“Come on, Pickles, old son!”

A boy of ten, with his face clean to the point of his jaws, came running from
the shack with a rifle sagging his right shoulder. Rawley waited until he came
up, then took the rifle, spun the boy half around and gave him a gentle push.

“Thanks, sonny. Ladies and children not allowed on this trip, however. You
stay and protect the women and babies, son. Got to leave a man in camp, you
know. Wounded to look after.”

The boy whirled back, valor overcoming his tongue-tied bashfulness. “Aw, he
wouldn’t come here! Gran’paw’d kill ’im. Gran’paw purt’ near did, one time. I
c’n shoot, mister. I c’n hit a rabbit in the eye from here to that big rock
over there.”

“Yes--well--this isn’t going to be a rabbit hunt. You stay here, sonny.”

“Aw, you’re as bad as Uncle Peter!” the boy muttered resentfully, kicking
small rocks with his bare toes. “I guess you’ll wish I’d come along, if Queo
gets after you!”

Rawley only laughed and swung up the trail, leading the burro behind him,
since he was not at all acquainted with the beast and had no desire to follow
it vainly to Nelson, for lack of the proper knowledge to halt it beside the
scene of Deacon’s downfall.

As he went, Rawley scanned the near-by ridges and the brush along the trail.
There was slight chance, according to his belief, that the outlaw Indian would
venture down this far, especially since he could not be sure he had failed to
kill Johnny Buffalo. On the other hand, he must have been rather desperate to
lie in wait for two women coming home with supplies. Rawley wondered why he
had remained up on the ridge; why he had not waited by the trail and robbed
them of such things as he needed. Then he remembered Nevada’s very evident
ability to whip wildcats, if necessary--certainly to meet any emergency
calmly--and shook his head. The old squaw, too, would probably do some clawing
if the occasion demanded, and she knew just who and why she was fighting. On
the whole, Rawley decided that Queo had merely borne out Johnny Buffalo’s
statement that he was a coward and had taken no chances. And from the boy’s
remark about his grandfather nearly killing Queo, he thought the outlaw had
not wanted his identity discovered.

As for his own risk, Rawley did not give it a second thought. Queo had been
well scared, finding two men on the job where he had expected to deal only
with women. He had been headed toward the river when Rawley last saw him. It
was more than probable that he would continue in that direction.

But it is never safe to guess what an Indian will do,--much less an Indian
outlaw who must become a beast of prey if he would live and keep his freedom.
Rawley remembered Johnny Buffalo’s pack and tied Pickles to a bush directly
under the spot where the shooting had taken place, while he climbed the ridge
to retrieve his belongings. He brought canteen and pack down to the trail and
hung them on the packsaddle, feeling absolutely secure. The ridge was hot and
deserted, even the birds and rabbits having taken cover from the heat.

He went on around the little bend and anchored the burro again while he
carried up a sack of potatoes, bacon, flour and a package wrapped in damp
canvas, which he guessed to be butter. The tribe of Cramer had what they
wanted to eat, at least, he reflected. Also, the load would have made a nice
grubstake for the outlaw. Two such burro loads would have supplied Queo for
months, adding what game he would undoubtedly kill.

Rawley had just finished packing the burro and had looped up the tie rope to
send Pickles down the home trail, when some warning (a sound, perhaps, or a
flicker of movement) caused him to look quickly behind him. He glimpsed a
dark, heavy face behind a leveled gun barrel, broken teeth showing in an evil
grin. Rawley threw himself to one side just as the gun belched full at him.
Something jerked his left arm viciously, and a numb warmth stole into that
side.

He dropped forward, his right hand flinging back to his holstered automatic
and drawing up convulsively with the gun in his hand.

“Thanks for packing the stuff!” chortled Queo, and the two fired
simultaneously.

Both scored hits. The leering, black face sobered and slid slowly out of sight
behind the rock. Rawley’s head dropped so that his face lay in the blistering
dust of the trail. Through his hat crown a small, singed hole showed in front,
a ragged tear opposite at the back. Pickles, scored on the leg with the second
shot from Queo’s gun, kicked savagely with both feet and went careening down
the trail toward home, his pack wabbling violently as he galloped.

It was the sight of him trotting down the trail alone that halted Nevada
midway between her rock dugout and the shack where Gladys was setting steaming
dishes on the table for the three men who were “washing up” at the bench under
the crude porch. Nevada gave a little cry and ran to meet Pickles, and the
first thing she noticed was the fresh, red furrow on his leg, from which the
blood was still dripping. Turning to call, she saw Peter coming close behind
her, wiping his face and neck as he walked.

“Oh, Uncle Peter--he’s been shot!” she cried tremulously. “It must be Queo
again.”

Peter’s eyes turned to the trail, visible for some distance up the side hill.
There was no one in sight, and without a word he turned back to his own house,
dug into the hill near Nevada’s, and presently returned, passing the girl with
long strides. He carried his rifle and struck into the hill trail bareheaded.
Nevada looked after him, her eyes wide and dark.

An hour later, Peter returned, walking steadily down the trail with Rawley on
his back. Without a word he passed the staring group at the shack and carried
his burden into the room where Johnny Buffalo lay in uneasy slumber. A step
sounded behind him, and he spoke without turning.

“Have Jess and Gladys bring that spring cot out of my cabin, Nevada. They’ll
be more contented in the same room. He got Queo--I found him behind a rock not
fifty feet from this chap. Now Queo’s cousin will take up the feud and get
this fellow--if he pulls out of this scrape.”

“Is he badly hurt?” Nevada was holding her voice steady from sheer will power.

“Arm smashed and a scalp wound. All depends on the care he gets. Well--” Peter
straightened and wiped his forehead, looking thoughtfully at Rawley, half
lying in a big chair, his long legs spread limply, his face white and streaked
with blood, “--we owe him good care, I guess. He must have killed Queo after
he’d been shot in the arm. And he’s saved this outfit some trouble. I didn’t
tell you--but Queo was laying for a chance at us. Well--run and get that cot
here.”

Nevada pushed back her craning family and sent them running here and there on
errands. Her grandfather and Jess, the husband of Gladys, looked at her
inquiringly from the porch of the shack. Rawley might have thought it strange
that they remained mere bystanders during the excitement. But Nevada did not
seem to notice their indifference.

“Queo shot him twice--but he killed Queo,” she told them. “Uncle Jess, you’re
to get his spring cot, Uncle Peter says, and fix a bed in there.” Her eyes
went challengingly to her grandfather. “Uncle Peter says we owe them the best
care we can give,” she stated clearly. “He says they have saved some lives in
this family.”

The tall, bearded old patriarch looked at her frowningly. He glanced toward
the rock cabin, grunted something unintelligible to the girl, and went in to
his interrupted dinner.




CHAPTER TEN

A FAMILY TREE


It seemed as fantastic as a troubled dream. To be lying there helpless, to
look across and see Johnny Buffalo staring grimly up at the ceiling, his face
set stoically to hide the pain that burned beneath the white bandage, held no
semblance of reality. Was it that morning only, that they had left the car and
started out to walk to the “great and high mountain”? Perhaps several days had
passed in oblivion. He did not know. To Rawley the shock of drifting back from
unconsciousness to these surroundings had been as great as the shock of
incredulous slipping down and down into blackness. He moved his head a
half-inch. The pain brought his eyebrows together, but he made no sound.
Johnny Buffalo must not be worried.

“All right again, are you?” Peter moved into Rawley’s range of vision. “You
had a close squeak. The thickness of your skull between you and death--that
was all. The bullet skinned along on the outside instead of the inside.”

“I’ll be all right then,” Rawley muttered thickly. “Don’t mean to be a
nuisance. Soon as this grogginess lets up--”

“You’ll be less trouble where you are,” Peter interrupted him bluntly. “I’ve
done all I can for you now, so I’ll go back to my work. The Injun’s making out
all right, too. Head clear as a bell, near as I can judge. I’ll see you this
evening, and if there’s anything you want, either of you, just pound that toy
drum beside you. That will bring one of the women.”

Rawley looked up at him, though the movement of his eyeballs was
excruciatingly painful. Again that sense of familiarity came to tantalize him.
What was it? Peter’s great, square shoulders, his eyes? He made another effort
to look more closely and failed altogether. His vision blurred; things went
black again. Perhaps he slept, after that. When he opened his eyes again a
cool wind was blowing; the intolerable glare outside the window had softened.

He was conscious of a definite feeling of satisfaction when Nevada appeared
with a tray of food such as fever patients may have; tea, toast, a bit of
fruit--mostly juice. Behind her waddled her grandmother; Rawley could not yet
believe in the reality of the relationship between this high-bred white girl
and the old squaw. In the back of his mind he thought there must be some joke;
or at least, he told himself, looking at the two closely, Nevada must be one
of the tribe by adoption. He had heard of such things.

And there was her Uncle Peter, who was a white man in looks, in personality,
everything. Yet Uncle Peter had flared proudly, “We may be breeds--but we
aren’t brutes.” He could only have meant himself and Nevada. He looked at her,
his eyes going again to the squaw with her gray bangs, the red kerchief, her
squat shapelessness.

Her fear of him seemed to have evaporated upon reflection. Her curiosity
concerning him had not, evidently. She set down the tray and stared at him
with a frank fixity that reminded Rawley of the solemn regard of the sloe-eyed
baby riding astride Aunt Gladys’ slatternly hip.

“You feed Johnny Buffalo, Grandmother,” Nevada directed. “He used to live in
this country when he was a boy. You can’t tell--you might be old
acquaintances.” She smiled, patted the old woman on a cushiony shoulder and
approached Rawley, who was suddenly resigned to his helplessness.

“Grandmother rather holds herself above full-blood Indians,” she whispered.
“She’s only half Indian, herself. I don’t want her to snub your partner; he
looks so lonely, somehow. What is it?”

“He’s grieving over my grandfather’s death,” Rawley told her, his own voice
dropped to an undertone that would not carry. “Until I proposed this trip he
didn’t want to live. He’s better, out here.”

“I do hope--”

A shrill ejaculation from the squaw brought Nevada’s head around. “What is it,
Grandmother?”

The old woman started a singsong Indian explanation, and Nevada smiled. “She
says they do know each other. She remembers him when he was a boy and was
lost.  So that’s fine. He can hear about all his old playmates and his
family.” She turned her back on them as if the duties of hostess sat more
lightly on her shoulders, since one of the patients could visit with her
grandmother.

“I’m wondering what happened, up the trail.”

Nevada thoughtfully cooled the tea with the spoon and looked at him
speculatively. “Uncle Peter can tell you better than I can--since I was not
permitted to go along. Besides, the less talking you do now, I believe, the
less danger there is of complications. Neither wound is so bad of itself,
Uncle Peter says. It’s having your head hurt, along with the broken bone in
the arm. Unless you are very quiet for a day or two, there may be fever; and
fevered blood makes slow healing. That’s Uncle Peter’s theory, and it must be
correct. He has books and studies all the time--when he isn’t working. Then,
of course, there’s the danger of infection from the outside; but he has been
very careful in the dressings. Johnny Buffalo,” she added after a minute, “is
worse off than you are. His shoulder blade is badly smashed. And then he’s so
much older.”

She was talking, he knew, to prevent him from doing so. And since his head
felt like a nest of crickets, all performing at once, he was content to let
her have her way. Across the room he could hear the intermittent murmur of the
two Indians, the voice of the grandmother droning musically, with sliding,
minor inflections as she recounted, no doubt, the history of the old man’s
family and friends.

He watched Nevada pour and sweeten a second cup of tea and did a swift mental
calculation in genealogy. Jess Cramer, he knew, was a white man. The husband
of Gladys, bearing the name of Grandfather King’s enemy, must be a son of the
old man and of this half-breed squaw. Very well, then, old Jess Cramer’s
children would be one quarter Indian--Peter, Jess and Nevada’s mother
(granting that Nevada was a blood relative). Nevada’s father must have been
white,--a Scotchman, by the name, and by Nevada’s clear skin and coppery hair.
Well, then, Nevada was--A knife thrust of pain stabbed through his brain, and
he could not think. Nevada set down the cup hastily and laid cool fingers on
his temple. He lifted his right hand and held her fingers there. The throbbing
agony lessened, grew fainter and fainter. After all, what did it matter--the
blood in those fingers? They were cool and sweet and soothing--

He thought Nevada had lifted her hand and was gently removing the bandage from
his head. But it was Uncle Peter, and Nevada was not there, and it was dark
outside. In another room a clock began to strike the hour. He counted nine. It
was strange; he could not remember going to sleep with her fingers pressed
against the pulse beat in his temple. Yet he must have slept for hours. He
closed his eyes and then opened them again, staring up with a child-like
candor into the man’s bent face.

“I know. You look like Grandfather,” he said thickly. And when Peter’s eyes
met his, “It’s your eyes. Grandfather had eyes exactly like yours. And there’s
something about the mouth--a bitterness. Gameness, too. Grandfather had his
legs off at the knees, for fifty years. Called himself a hunk of meat in a
wheel chair. God, it must be awful--a thing like that, when the rest of you is
big and strong--but you’re not crippled that way. Oh, Johnny! Are you awake?”
He heard a grunt. “I’ve got it--what you meant at first, about seeing your
sergeant. Uncle Peter looks like--”

A hand went over his mouth quite unexpectedly and effectually. He looked up
into the eyes like Grandfather King’s and found them very terrible.

“Fool! Never whisper it. Am I not the son of Jess Cramer? It had better be so!
Better not see that I am like his enemy--and rival.” He leaned close, his eyes
boring into the eyes so like his own. “One word to any one that would slur my
mother, and--” he pressed his lips together, his meaning told by his eyes.
“She came to me to-day, chattering her fear. Old Jess Cramer lives with other
thoughts, and his eyes are dim at close range. Never come close to him, boy.
Never recall the past to him. It would mean--God knows what it would mean. My
mother’s life, maybe. And then his own, for I’d kill him, of course, if he
touched her.”

Rawley blinked, trying to make sense of the riddle. Then his good hand went
out and rested on Peter’s arm, that was trembling under the thin shirt sleeve.

“Uncle Peter!” His lips barely moved to form the words, and afterward they
smiled. “The blood of the Kings! I’m glad--”

“Are you?” Peter bent over him fiercely. “Proud of a man who went away and
left my mother--”

“He had to go,” Rawley defended hastily. “He meant to come back in a month’s
time. But he was shot through the legs, and in hospital for months, and then
sent home a cripple. After that he lost his legs altogether. How could he come
back? Johnny can tell you.”

Peter pulled himself together and redressed the long, angry gash on Rawley’s
head. Johnny Buffalo, having slowly squirmed his body to a position that gave
him a view of Rawley’s cot, watched them unblinkingly, his wise old eyes
gravely inscrutable. When he had finished, Peter strode to the door and stood
there looking out. Rawley had a queer feeling that he was looking for
eavesdroppers.

“What you say will make my mother happier,” he told Rawley, coming back and
speaking in his usual calm tone of immutable reserve. “She seemed very bitter
to-day when she talked with me. She has always thought your grandfather went
away knowing he would never come back. And she has proud, Spanish blood in her
veins--”

“Anita, by ----!” Rawley’s jaw dropped in sheer, crestfallen amazement.

“Did he tell you?” Peter eyed him queerly.

“It’s the diary. The beautiful, half-Spanish girl, all fire and life--he
described her like that. And--”

“Well, they change as they grow old.” Peter’s lips twitched in a grin. “The
beautiful Spanish señoritas get fat and ugly, and the Indian women are more
so. Your grandfather’s fiery Spanish girl had nothing to pull her up the hill.
Monotony, hardships--one can’t wonder if the recidivous influences surrounding
her all these years pulled her down to the dead level of her mother’s people.
Take this Indian here--” he tilted his head toward Johnny Buffalo--“he was
taken out of it when he was a kid. Now, aside from certain traits of dignity
and repression, I imagine he’s more white than Indian.”

Rawley nodded. “Lived right with Grandfather all his life and has studied and
read everything he could get his hands on. He’s better educated than lots of
college men; aren’t you, Johnny?”

“Yes. I think very much, of many things which Indians do not know. I do not
talk very much. And that is wisdom also.”

“Mother had nothing from books. When her youth went and she began to take on
weight, she dropped her pretty ways and became like the squaws. I remember,
and it used to hurt my pride to see her slip into their ways. I was--white.”
His mouth shut grimly.

Rawley lay looking into his face, trying to realize the full significance of
this amazing truth. His grandfather’s son, and Anita’s. His own uncle. With
Indian blood, but his uncle nevertheless. If Grandfather King had known--

“He’d have been proud,” he said aloud, “to have a son like you. He always
wanted--and my father was a weakling, physically, I mean. He died when I was
just a kid. Grandfather called him a damned milksop, because he wanted to work
in a bank. Johnny can tell you a lot about Grandfather--your--father.” He
lowered his voice, mindful of Peter’s warning. And then, “Does Nev--does your
niece know about it?”

“She does not. The fewer who know it, the better for all concerned. There will
be four of us, as it is. There mustn’t be five. Why make the lives of two old
people bitter? Old Jess--I’ve a brother, Young Jess--thinks I am his son. He
needs me, and Nevada needs me. We’ve hung together, in spite of the mixed
breed you see us. Jess is Injun in looks and ways. Nevada’s mother was all
white. Jess married a mission half-breed girl, and their kids are Injun to the
bone. Belle, Nevada’s mother, married a Scotchman--good blood, I always
thought, from his looks and actions. Nevada’s--Nevada.”

He said it proudly, and Rawley felt his blood tingle with something of the
same pride.

From the other bed Johnny Buffalo spoke suddenly. “Anita, your mother, is my
cousin. The daughter of my aunt. My blood is mingled with the blood of my
sergeant’s son. My heart is now alive again and life is good. My sergeant has
gone where he can walk on two feet, and I am left to care for his son and his
grandson. I now see that God is very wise.”

“He is?” Peter pulled down his heavy, black brows and the corners of his lips.
“I’ve spent a good deal of time wondering about that. There’s Nevada--and
one-eighth Indian. Is that--”

“Oh, what the devil difference does that make?” Rawley gave a flounce that
made him groan. But in the midst of it he managed to growl, “You said it
yourself; Nevada’s--Nevada.”




CHAPTER ELEVEN

RAWLEY THINKS THINGS OUT


At intervals of fevered wakefulness during that night, Rawley went over and
over the astonishing state of affairs. The hour and the temperature that was
almost inevitable conspired to twist and exaggerate the truth, to give him an
intolerable sense of kinship with the slovenly, platter-faced Gladys, the
stolid obesity of the old squaw, and of a hopeless abyss between himself and
Nevada. They were related, somehow. They must be, since her Uncle Peter was
also his uncle. Uncle Peter, he thought, had been terribly wronged, and he
must somehow make amends, must remove the handicap of that savage blood. In
the morning he must tell Gladys that he was her cousin; why, that made him
Indian, too! No wonder his hair was so black, and he loved the wilderness with
such a passion. He was part Indian, that was why. Johnny Buffalo was some
relation; how Rawley’s mother would hate that!

What he did not know was that he talked about it, with Johnny Buffalo awake
and listening in the bed against the farther wall, and with Peter awake, too,
in a bed he had made for himself on the porch. He remembered that Peter came
and gave him a drink, and that it did not seem to matter so much, after that.
He slept late into the morning, after the opiate, and awoke to a saner point
of view.

As before, Nevada and her grandmother brought trays of food and helped the two
helpless ones to eat. With the knowledge Peter had given him, Rawley looked
with more interest at the old lady, covertly trying to see the slim little
half-caste Spanish girl whom Grandfather King had found “the joy of his
heart.” On the whole, Rawley could not feel that his grandfather would have
gone on loving, in any case. And he could not get away from the fact that
Anita had consoled herself with considerable expedition.

“You aren’t such a hero, after all,” Nevada bantered him, bringing him out of
his revery with a laugh. “You’re looking abominably well, this morning, for a
young man who was brought in dead only yesterday. And after all, you did not
kill Queo. Uncle Jess and Uncle Peter went up to the spot last evening, just
before dark, to identify him beyond all doubt, and--he’d disappeared. They
found where he had lain behind the rock, and they knew he was wounded, by the
blood.” She shivered involuntarily. “But he wasn’t anywhere to be found. Uncle
Peter feels quite put out. He looked at Queo when he went up after you, and he
felt sure the man was dead. So now, if he lives, he’ll be more venomous than
ever.”

“Then I’m sorry I hit him at all,” Rawley declared. “But I had to. He was
after the grub, all right. He thanked me for carrying it up to the trail for
him. Then he plugged me--I didn’t duck quite soon enough. So--I always hate to
be killed, like that,” he finished whimsically.

“That sounds like Uncle Peter,” Nevada observed. “Your voice, I mean.
Grandmother, don’t you think Mr. King looks and talks like Uncle Peter?”

Rawley tried not to look as startled as he felt. The pillowy (after all, one
letter would have called her willowy in the old days, so that not so much had
been changed) Anita walked deliberately over to them, advancing one side at a
time, like a duck that travels in a leisurely mood. She laid her cushioned
knuckles on her bulging hips and regarded Rawley steadfastly.

“Mebby he look--a lil bit,” she conceded with a superb indifference. “Peter,
he t’inner--a lil bit. More darker. More--like his fadder, Jesse.”

“Yes-s--he does look more like Grandfather, of course. But I do think Mr. King
looks like them both.” Nevada spoke with a perfect sincerity which sent the
spirits of three persons up a notch or two.

Rawley laughed. “Well, maybe we’re some relation--away back,” he said
recklessly. “A Cramer, connected with my family, was known to have come West,
years ago. I remember reading it in some old record. But I’m afraid I can’t
claim he was very closely related. In fact, I rather think he wasn’t.” His
eyes met the eyes of old Anita, and he almost thought he saw a gleam of
approval in them. He could not be sure.

Of the look in the eyes of Peter, who was standing in the doorway, he was much
more positive. The color came into his face as their eyes met. After all,
others were sure to notice the resemblance, and there must be some explanation
ready.

“I’m sure that’s it.” Nevada laughed softly. “You’re a fourth or fifth cousin,
perhaps. Likenesses do travel that way. I wonder if Grandfather would know.”

“I wouldn’t want to ask him,” her Uncle Peter observed in his grim way. “Why
stir the old man up for days, just to satisfy idle curiosity?” He laid his
hand on Nevada’s head, smoothing back a lock of her hair with a gesture
inexpressibly tender. “On the strength of the fifth-cousin relationship, seems
like we might drop the Mr. King. Father hates to think of his past,--a quarrel
with his family brought him West, as nearly as I can make out. What do folks
call you, young man, when they know you well?”

“Oh, Rawley is what I grew up under. George Rawlins King is my name. I wish
you would call me Rawley. Then I could say Uncle Peter, and Nevada,
and--Grandmother, maybe, if Mrs. Cramer will let me.”

“Uncle me all you please,” grinned Peter. “And Nevada is down on all the
school maps. If you don’t mind, when you do meet father, let it be as George
Rawlins. Your last name might or might not recall a family quarrel. But--we
spare him excitement as much as possible. And while you’re here, the outfit
will call you--Rawlins.”

“Well, then I’ll explain to Aunt Gladys,” said Nevada, as if they were
planning a secret for fun; and yet there was a certain look of anxiety, too,
in her face. “I think I can manage her--but then she never says much to
Grandfather, anyway. They don’t like each other very well,” she explained to
Rawley. “Grandfather was angry when Uncle Jess married her, and while they
never quarrel, it is merely toleration. Aunt Gladys won’t tell.”

Rawlins then lay for a long time thinking how strangely the pattern is woven
into the woof of Life. With the sun shining and the noise of playing children
outside, the unexpected turn of events seemed more natural. So much had
happened in the past twenty-four hours that Rawley found himself checking up,
as he called it, on events and emotions engendered by the sudden crises. He
glanced across at the other bed and found Johnny Buffalo awake and seemingly
comfortable; wherefore he made bold to ask a few questions.

“Johnny, I thought I had those women hidden around a bend in the trail. How
did Queo manage to spot them so as to try a shot? I’ve been wondering about
that first rifle shot. Are you sure it was fired at us?”

“I am sure. You were not hidden altogether. I, myself, could see heads, though
I could not see the trail. Queo was higher. I think that little point was too
low.”

“Well, that accounts for it. I lost my bearings down there, then. Part of the
ridge was hidden, I know. I thought it was the place where he was located. He
shot wide, anyway.” He lay looking at a Las Vegas merchant’s calendar,
reviewing still the immediate past.

“There’s another thing that just struck me this morning. How did Grandfather
know that Jess Cramer was located here on the river? Jess was a soldier at the
fort, I thought, when Grandfather saw him last. It’s in the diary.”

“I think you should read again more carefully, my son. My sergeant spoke to me
often of Jess Cramer. He had found gold here at this canyon. He was often at
the fort, spending his gold in the games of chance. Jess Cramer played not for
sport, but to win. A sergeant’s pay was not large, and my sergeant spent many
hours in searching for such gold as Jess Cramer brought with him to the fort.
My sergeant had won a little. He kept it and searched for more of the same. It
was not only for Anita that the two quarreled. A woman and gold make hatreds
that do not die. He did not tell me all. He longed for a son who would take up
the search. Or so I believed. I did not know that he had found his gold. I
thought that the nuggets he gave to you he had won at cards from Jess Cramer.
He told you that he picked them up. My sergeant does not lie. So I know that
he had found the gold he had sought, and that if you obeyed him you would
learn the secret he had kept from me.”

“He had a son,” Rawley muttered, “and he’d have been proud of him if he had
known about him. Johnny, I can’t help thinking that Peter is more
Grandfather’s son than my father was.”

Johnny Buffalo meditated, staring at the ceiling.

“There was love,” he said softly at last. “My sergeant did not love the mother
of your father. I could see in his eyes when he looked upon her that his
thoughts were not with her, and that his heart was far away.”

They lay for a long time silent. Each thought that the other slept, he lay so
still. But of a sudden Rawley reached up his uninjured hand and pushed back
the bandage that was slipping over his eye. The movement betrayed not so much
protest against a physical discomfort as the impatient mind that seeks in vain
for the correct answer to a puzzle.

But Johnny Buffalo did not sleep. He lay staring at the ceiling, his mouth
closed firmly with lines beside it which nature draws to show when the soul is
weary. But there was no longer any bitterness there, though there was pain.
The hollow eyes glowed steadily, as if the old man had found a light ahead
somewhere in the blackness of his grief. Once, a gentle snore drew his
attention, and he turned his head and stared for a long while at the young,
unlined face with the bandage drawn diagonally above it. For Rawley the Great
Game had only begun; his stakes were piled before him, to win or to lose. The
old Indian wondered gravely how that Game would be played. Wisely?
Bravely,--he was sure. Honestly,--he hoped.




CHAPTER TWELVE

RAWLEY PLAYS THE GAME


How wisely, how honestly, how bravely he would play the Great Game, Rawley
unconsciously indicated that evening, when Peter sat alone with the two, after
Nevada and her grandmother had given them their supper and gone away. Peter
had declared himself rather proud of his surgical skill, and had almost
yielded to Rawley’s importunities that he might get up and dress in the
morning and help take care of Johnny Buffalo. But Peter had his father’s
firmness, after all.

“I took five stitches in that gash on your head,” he explained. “Queo uses
slugs to knock over an elephant. I’m not so sure your skull isn’t cracked. You
talk rather crack-brained, sometimes.” (That was Peter’s first joke with
them.) “Best wait until we’re sure, anyway.”

Rawley gave an embarrassed kind of laugh and sent an involuntary, inquiring
glance at Johnny Buffalo.

“I wish you’d lock the door, Uncle Peter, and then bring me my coat. I’ve got
something on my mind other than a cracked skull and embroidered hide.

“Now, to make the thing clear to you, Uncle Peter, I’ll have to say that
Grandfather left here expecting to come back--and I hope you told your mother
what happened.”

Peter nodded.

“Well, there Grandfather was, helpless. It made him kind of proud and bitter,
and he sort of held himself away from folks. But he was disappointed because
my father was sickly and didn’t take to anything outdoors, and I never met him
face to face, or spoke a word to him, until the night before he died. Of
course nobody dreamed he was going--I don’t think he did, or Johnny, even.

“At any rate, he sent for me. And he said I was all King, and he had waited to
make sure. He talked a little and gave me his old diary and an old Bible his
mother had given him. He told me to read the Bible--that there was a lot in
it, if I read it carefully. It was the last talk I had with him. He died in
the night.

“Well, the point I’m getting at is this: Grandfather had a secret--about a
mine out here. He had it all described, in a kind of code that sure had me
guessing blind for awhile. I found a long list of Bible references, you
see--no one would ever think of wading through the bunch, unless it was a
preacher, maybe; and he wouldn’t need to. It took me a while to catch on to
the fact that they meant something. Grandfather, you must know, wasn’t
religious. Anything but. So the crux of the matter was those references looked
so darned dry and innocent, and they were the only thing I could find to work
on. Johnny, there, made it mighty plain to me that I’d better work on
_something_. I tried Poe’s cipher, and I looked up all the references. I will
say that just reading verse after verse, according to the references, they
make snappy reading; murder and bloodshed and bigamy and the wrath of God. And
names I couldn’t pronounce, of tribes headed out on the warpath. It was great
stuff--not.

“But finally I dug into the little old Bible Grandfather had carried around
with him--and hadn’t read, or the book’s a liar--and I got this. I want to
read it to you: I dug it out by writing down words and phrases in all the
verses, that Grandfather had marked. I’ll read it as if it were
altogether--which it wasn’t, by a long shot:

    “Gold is mine, more than heart could wish. My son, if thou wilt receive my
    words and hide my commandments with thee, I will give thee riches, and
    wealth, such as none of the Kings have had that have been before thee. Be
    wise, now, therefore, be instructed. Of the gold, there is no number. The
    land whither ye go to possess it is a land of hills and valleys.

    “Do this, now, my son. Go through a city which is by the river in the
    wilderness, yet making many rich. In the midst thereof a ferry-boat which
    is by the brink of the river. Take victuals with you for the journey. Turn
    you northward into the wilderness, to a great and high mountain; cedar
    trees in abundance scattered over the face of the high mountain. In the
    cliffs there is a path which no fowl knoweth, and which the vulture’s eye
    hath not seen. Come to the top of the mount. Pass over unto the other
    side, westward. On the hillside, a very great heap of stones joined to a
    dry tree. Go into the clefts of the rocks, into the tops of the jagged
    rocks, to the sides of the pit. Take heed, now--that is exceeding deep. It
    is hid from the eyes of all living. Creep into the midst thereof,
    eastward, two hundred and fourscore feet. Ye shall find a pure river of
    water. Proceed no further. There is gold heavier than the sand; pure gold
    upon the sand. And all the gold thou shalt take up. Then shalt thou
    prosper if thou takest heed. I know thy poverty, but thou art rich.

    “Take heed, now. On the hillside which is upon the bank of the river in
    the wilderness, there shall the vultures also be gathered. Ye shall find
    him that is mine enemy. His mouth is full of cursing, under his tongue is
    mischief and vanity. Be watchful--the heart is desperately wicked.

    “He that keepeth his mouth, keepeth his life. I put my trust in thee. Now,
    my son, the Lord be with thee and prosper thou.”

Rawley folded the paper, looking up under his bandaged brows at Uncle Peter,
and sending a glance past him to the unreadable face of Johnny Buffalo.

“So that’s what I dug out of his Bible. He meant it for his son. He told me so
himself. But he said my dad wasn’t the man to get anything out of it--which
was true. When he passed it on to me, he--he didn’t know he had another son
who _could_ make good on the proposition. It’s yours, by rights. He just gave
it to me because he didn’t know of any one else. And--all I ask, Uncle Peter,
is that you make some kind of provision for Johnny, over there. I told him
we’d go fifty-fifty, and--” he held out the folded paper to Peter--“Johnny’s
been hands and feet and a loyal friend to Grandfather, all these years. Fifty.
Just think of that, Uncle Peter. Grandfather didn’t have anything but his
pension--and this. He didn’t say so, but I know he expected me to look after
Johnny. I will, of course. I can make good money at my profession. And I want
to say, Uncle Peter,” he added boyishly, “that I’m mighty glad Grandfather
left something--for his son.”

Rawley lay back with a relieved sigh and watched Peter, his eyes smiling a
little. He did not think that he had done any unusual thing. Peter was exactly
the kind of son whom Grandfather King had longed for, all these years. Rawley
guessed that Peter, too, had been defrauded of the father he would have
worshiped. It was a foregone conclusion that, had Grandfather King known
Peter, he would have sent him, long ago, hunting for the mine. And while Peter
had not said so, Rawley guessed shrewdly that Peter did not greatly admire
Jess Cramer, in spite of the fact that he had believed the man his father. His
nightmare thoughts, that he had somehow defrauded Peter, were wiped out once
for all. The code had been written for the son of King, of the Mounted. The
son had it. No more was to be said.

Peter opened the paper and read it through slowly, a corner of his lip drawn
between his teeth. What he thought, no man could say. He finished the reading
and folded the paper slowly, looking at Rawley afterward from under his heavy
brows.

“Have you still got the Bible and the references?” he asked.

“Yes. In my safe deposit box, in St. Louis.”

“Humph.” Peter deliberately twisted the paper into a spill, felt in his pocket
for a match, and as deliberately set fire to the paper, turning and tilting it
until the creeping flame was about to scorch his fingers. He laid the stub on
the floor, bent and watched it go black, then set his foot upon the charred
fragments.

“Boy, you keep what was given you. If I’ve any right in it, I’ll sign that
right over to you. But never mention that--” he motioned toward the ashes on
the floor--“above your breath. Your grand--my father was right. The vultures
are perched here by the river, and the old vulture’s eye is never shut. While
you’re here, forget it. Both of you.”

“But it isn’t mine. It’s yours, Uncle Peter. I don’t want it--now.”

“If it’s mine, then it will never be found. I don’t need it. When the vultures
swoop down and light--the feast will be big enough even for them. But I warn
you, remember. Never speak of that again, in this camp.” He stood up, gazing
down at Rawley much as Grandfather King had looked at him that night. With a
quick, impulsive movement he stooped and laid his hand over Rawley’s, pressing
it warmly. He smiled; and there was that in the smile which made Rawley draw
in his breath sharply.

“If Fate had dealt the cards straight to me--I might have had you for _my_
son!”

He drew his hand away, turned and walked out.




CHAPTER THIRTEEN

THE COLORADO


The tribe of Cramer dined. In the shack beside the big mesquite tree was heard
the clatter of knives and forks--more knives than forks, one might guess--the
dull clink of enameled ware, the high, demanding voices of hungry children
more Indian than white. Above all the clamor of feeding, the shrill petulance
of Aunt Gladys could be heard rising above all other sounds as she
expostulated incessantly with her young. The baby was crying monotonously.
Some one kicked a dog, which shot out of the open door ki-yi-ing hysterically.

In the smaller rock dugout, tinkle of glass and silver plate and china
betrayed the fact that the white blood held itself aloof from the red at
mealtime. In the larger cabin built for Nevada, Rawley had just finished his
supper, eaten with Johnny Buffalo in a punctilious regard for the old man’s
feelings, though he had been invited to join Peter and Nevada at table.

In the matter of recovery, young bones were healing much faster than the old.
Rawley had been promoted to a gauze pad held in place by strips of adhesive
over the long gash on his head. His arm had settled down to the dull, grinding
ache and intolerable deep itching of knitting bone and healing flesh. Johnny
Buffalo, splinted and bandaged, was able to sit propped in cushions in a big
chair on the porch.

Rawley left him reading deliberately the matchless “Apology” of Socrates,
which Peter had lent him that day, and started out for a walk, choosing
between his own company and the companionship of Nevada, which seemed always
to bring at least half the tribe of Cramer at their heels like the dragging
tail of a kite. Rawley reflected disgustedly that as yet he had never had five
consecutive minutes alone with Nevada. When her grandmother was not filling
the foreground, the offspring of Aunt Gladys formed a snuffling, big-eared
background which Nevada sweepingly termed the Little Pitchers. Whether Nevada
enjoyed the company of the Little Pitchers on their infrequent strolls to the
river bank, or approved the solid chaperonage of the juglike Anita, Rawley had
never been able to decide. Nevada’s manner toward her dark-skinned kinsfolk
was impartially and imperturbably gracious. Indeed, Rawley sometimes suspected
that she deliberately encouraged their tagging along. Four goggling kids and
three dogs, he considered, might be recommended as a romance-proof
chaperonage.

Mechanically he walked straight down to the river, to the spot which Nevada
always chose as their destination. A flat rock there formed a convenient place
to sit and enjoy the view of the river and the hills beyond. Across the
swift-moving, muddy stream, bottom lands covered with cottonwoods gave a
refreshing touch of green to the picture. Arizona cottonwoods they were, since
the Colorado formed the dividing line. Away to the southwest, he could see the
hills made familiar at Kingman. Rough, rather forbidding mountains they had
been at close range, but now they were made soft and alluring by the blue haze
of distance. Straight down the river he could see the hill that looked down on
El Dorado, that “city forsaken.” Up the river he could not see, because of the
high, granite cliffs that blocked the view.

Because nature had seemed to bar the way, Rawley turned and made his way
aimlessly toward the barrier. With his left arm in splints and carried in a
sling, he could not do much in the way of climbing; but presently he stumbled
upon a well-defined path leading amongst bowlders just under the rim of the
basin. The path led up the canyon, and Rawley followed it with a desultory
interest in seeing where it led,--and for the exercise it promised. Perhaps,
had he given the matter thought, he would have owned that a strange trail
never failed to tempt his feet to follow. At any rate, he held to the pathway.

Now the river was hidden completely from him, though he could hear it
complaining over the bowlders in the canyon and hurrying through as fast as if
indignation lent it speed. The path went on, finding the easiest places to
worm through the jagged rocks and climbing closer and closer to the river,
whose roar became more distinct as he neared it.

Through a split in the huge wall so narrow as to be almost a crevice, the
trail led him quite suddenly to a narrow shelf set sheer above the river.
Crude steps cut in the rock went down the cliff at a slant. He heard the water
worrying over something unseen at the bottom, and began to descend, his right
hand steadying himself against the granite wall. He was curious, somewhat
mystified. Neither Peter nor Nevada had mentioned any possibility of reaching
the water’s edge in the canyon.

He found himself in a tiny cove which had been formed when some primal
upheaval had split the granite wall at the base, throwing the outside into the
river. No more than a wide crack, it was, but it was serving well a purpose. A
small, rock landing filled the shore end of the slit completely. Riding
quietly in the slack water of the small anchorage, a squat, powerful looking
launch sat bow to the landing, secured there by a heavy chain.

A great deal of labor had gone into the making of that landing and the steps
leading down to it. His trained eyes could see where an inner portion of the
jagged point had been cleverly blown off in such manner that the huge
fragments formed a most natural appearing breakwater, making quiet water
within instead of a moiling swirl. If the Cramers wanted a secret landing on
the river, here was one ideally suited to their needs.

But the Cramers had another landing, in plain sight of the flat rock at the
rim of the basin. At that landing also a launch was tied; a very ordinary
launch of a type sufficiently sturdy to combat easily enough the strong river
current. It was that other launch that was out of repair so that a trip to
Needles had been declared impossible. True enough, this launch might also be
out of commission, but Rawley did not think so. Stopping and looking in at the
engine, he judged that it was in very good working order indeed, and from
certain little, indefinable signs, he believed that it had been lately used.
By whom he did not know, although he remembered now that Young Jess--who was
not so young as he sounded, since he was well past forty--had not been in
evidence lately among his family.

He saw all that was to be seen and retraced his steps up the rock stairway. It
could not matter, one way or the other, if the Cramers kept a dozen secret
landings on the river. Nevertheless, Rawley was frankly puzzled. He thought he
could guess why his Uncle Peter had not wanted to take them to Needles in this
large boat. If he really meant to keep this boat a secret, it would scarcely
do to run it down to the house landing, alongside the smaller, crippled
launch. Rawley and Johnny might come back, some time, and they might ask about
the second launch, seeing only one down there at the other landing.

Some one must want absolute freedom to come and go by the river without
observation, he decided. With the smaller launch innocently swinging in the
eddy at the lower landing, the Cramers would naturally appear to be at home,
or ranging in the hills; whereas one or two of them might be absent in this
boat here. It was very simple,--and very mystifying as well. The rock landing
stage was built to make safe anchorage in high water as in low; which proved
conclusively that this was an all-year landing.

At the top he hesitated, in some doubt as to whether he should return to the
house or follow the path on up the canyon. He yielded to the unknown trail,
which was singularly well-traveled for a trail that apparently led directly
away from any logical destination. He had not gone far when he came upon the
flat, level space of a dump. Close beside him the black mouth of a tunnel
opened into the cliff rising a sheer hundred feet above his head. He stopped,
astonished at this unexpected ending of the trail. The solid face of granite
gave no indication whatever of carrying mineral of any kind. There was no
logical reason, therefore, for all this evidence of development work.

The ethics of his profession forbade his prowling underground without being
invited. He would as soon open an unlocked door and go spying through a man’s
house and personal belongings. From the size of the dump he judged that the
workings extended for some distance underground, and from the look of the rock
that had come from the tunnel he knew that any hope of reaching mineral was
likely to remain long unfulfilled. Instinctively he picked up a piece of rock
here and there, looked at it and threw it aside. If they were driving in to a
contact, he thought, the Cramers must have sharp eyes indeed for surface
indications. Knowing mineral formations at a glance was a part of his trade,
and he had seen absolutely nothing that would lead him to the point of
advising any man to lift a shovelful of muck.

He turned back. The afterglow was purpling across the river, and he did not
want to be too long away from Johnny Buffalo. He reached a turn in the trail
where a jutting crag thrust out and overhung the river,--and there he stopped
short.

Perched on the point of the crag like the vulture his grandfather had named
him, Old Jess Cramer leaned and looked down upon the hurrying waters, a full
six hundred feet below him. The distance between them was mostly a matter of
altitude, for Old Jess had climbed considerably to reach that particular
point. Staring up at him, Rawley was struck with a certain weird resemblance
to that predatory bird. There was something sinister about him as he sat
there; something rapacious and purposeful. It was as if he meant to seize the
river and wrest from it something which his greed desired. While he looked,
Old Jess stretched out his arm and shook his fist at the roaring stream.

Rawley turned away. Something within him revolted at the sight, though even to
himself he could not have explained why. As his gaze dropped from Old Jess to
the trail, there was Peter standing looking from one to the other. Peter’s
face was stern, his eyes cold with disapproval. It seemed to Rawley that he
was purposely blocking the trail.

“I see you’ve done quite a lot of development work back there,” Rawley
remarked to cover a vague embarrassment.

“Yes. Quite a lot. Did you go in?”

Rawley smiled at what seemed to him a needless question. “Certainly not. I
never go underground unless I’m hired to do so.”

He thought he saw relief in his Uncle Peter’s eyes.

“Well, I never saw any particular fun in it, myself. It’s all work, to me.” He
turned and seemed to be awaiting Rawley’s pleasure. “If you want a view,”
Peter hazarded drily, “you ought to go down to where the river swings east,
below the basin where we live. You can look straight up the canyon here for a
long way. Cliffs are too jagged here to get much of a view; there’s a bulge in
the canyon that interferes.”

“It’s better down at the landing in front of the house than it is here,”
Rawley agreed carelessly. “I see now why Nevada always heads straight for that
big, flat rock.”

He caught a swift, questioning side glance from Uncle Peter and knew beyond
all doubt that the big launch, the hewn-rock stairway and the tunnel in the
cliff were things which he was not supposed to know about. But the reason for
the secrecy he could not guess.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN

THE VULTURE SCREAMS


A high-keyed snarl brought the two sharply facing the crag. Bearing down upon
them with his fists flailing the air in a kind of impotent fury came old Jess
Cramer, like a vulture fighting for his feast. Rawley had seen the old man at
a short distance, but he had never before stood face to face with him. He
would cheerfully have missed the meeting now. Old Jess craned his long neck
toward him, his bleak, blue-gray eyes venomous. But it was Peter to whom he
spoke--screamed, rather.

“Told ye it’d come to this, didn’t I? You _would_ take ’em in and pet ’em up,
and treat ’em better’n you do your own kin! Think so much of ’em you had to go
and show ’em what we’re doing and why! Reckon when we touch ’er off and git
the damned river penned back, you’ll beg ’em on your knees to go down and claw
out gold till they wear their fingers to the bone!

“What have I slaved for and worked for and hoarded for, all these years? To
let you give away the gold when we git it? Is this the kind uh thing I raised
ye for? Take in the first stranger that comes snoopin’ around the place, and
bring him sight-seein’ up here to our dam! You--!”

Rawley had thought the miners he sometimes worked among could curse, but he
stood agape before the blistering vituperations of this gray-bearded old man.
He looked at Peter, wondering how any man with the King blood could have
endured his fancied father’s vile tongue all these years. Peter stood with a
face of iron, his eyes terribly blue and hard, and listened impersonally to
the frenzied outburst.

“That’s enough, now. Shut up and listen to me!”

It was like snapping a whip in the face of a roaring lion. Old Jess had
stopped merely to gasp fresh air into his lungs so that he could go on. He
glared at Peter, weakened and cringed. The fire that had flared in his eyes
died as suddenly. He looked toward the river, looked at Rawley and his glance
slid away from the two of them.

“What’d yuh want to go and let it all out to him for?” he half whimpered. “Now
he’ll want a share--and there might not be more ’n five or six millions in the
hull damned river bed! And you know ’s well as I do, Peter, that our dam is
liable as not to go out, next high water. We won’t have many months to work
in, mebby. I--I want a word with yuh, Peter. I--I want a word with yuh, that’s
all. I guess mebby you know what you’re up to, but--”

“Shut up!” Peter snapped the verbal whip again. His eyes turned briefly toward
Rawley. “What’s been let out, you did yourself, dad.” (Rawley thought that
Peter hesitated over the last word.) “I have never breathed one word of our
plan. Slave? What have _I_ been slaving for, all these years? Do you think _I_
have not endured everything but dishonor, for the sake of the millions we plan
to get? And Nevada--what about _her_? Hasn’t she done the work of a man and
slaved over her studies, so that she could help, too? It’s you, letting go
your tongue and raving like a fool, that has betrayed the secret. _You’ve_
done it. This man didn’t know or suspect a thing, till you let it out,
accusing me of telling!”

The old man looked uneasily from one to the other. Peter stared unrelentingly
at him. Rawley, stealing a glance at his face, thought that he knew now the
kind of man his Grandfather King had been in his old, fighting days.

“Now, he’ll have to know.” Peter’s voice relaxed the tension. It was as if he
had suddenly determined to accept the situation and make the best of it,--and
the most. “He can be trusted, I think. He’ll _have_ to be trusted, after your
blathering.”

Old Jess turned his predatory eyes on Rawley, and his beard moved to a
sinister smile beneath.

“You’re a big man, Peter--and it ain’t but a few steps to the edge!” He tilted
his head backwards toward the river. There was no possibility of mistaking his
meaning. But he added a sentence to clinch it: “She never gives up a body--the
Colorado don’t!”

Peter’s grin was a withering thing to face. Again the old man cringed, and his
eyes shifted like a cornered rat.

“I’ll remember that, if you open your mouth again. I’m strong--and the river
never gives up a dead man. You keep that in mind, will you?” Peter insisted
ominously.

“He shan’t have none of _my_ share,” Old Jess shrilled, his voice cracking
with anger and fear. “It was my idee, before you was born, Peter. You shan’t
rob me in my old age--you shan’t, now! I’ll be the first one to pick up the
gold--that’s been understood, since you was big enough to talk. An’ he better
not let it out to anybody! I’ll kill him if he does--you mark me, Peter! I’ll
kill any man that stands in my road to them millions I been watching over all
these long years--scrabbling the gold together, ounce by ounce, till I’ve got
enough to do it! A million dollars--but I’ll reap a thousand dollars for one.
You mark what I say; I’ll kill anybody that tries to horn in--It’s mine, every
bit of it!”

“In that case,” said Peter contemptuously, “you can go ahead and get it.”

“All but your share’s mine, Peter. Yours and Young Jess’ and Nevada’s. This
feller better not think--”

“He only thinks you’re a fool,” Peter told him harshly. “Stay and watch your
gold, then. It might float off!” He motioned with his head toward home, and
Rawley obeyed the signal and started ahead of him down the trail, wondering a
good deal over the encounter.

“Looks like I’m driving you off,” Peter remarked after a bit. “But I’m merely
bringing up the rear. Old Jess is not all there. I’ll tell you all about it,
now he’s told so much. I had half a mind to, anyway, if I could get him and
Young Jess to agree. You’re a mining engineer. I kind of wanted your opinion
and advice. It is out of your line, probably; but technical training helps. I
never had any, myself. Old Jess is a slave driver, all right. And now he’s
half crazy, and I wouldn’t want to go off and leave him with the women. If a
stranger happened along and roused his suspicion, there’s no prophesying what
might happen.”

“It sounds pretty wild, to me, all his talk,” Rawley returned after a minute.
“I can easily believe the old man’s crazy. I can’t seem to get any sense out
of it; millions of gold--and all that. Uncle Peter, were you just stringing
him along--because he’s crazy?”

Peter laughed queerly. “I can’t wonder at your thinking so,” he said. “Sit
down here, and I’ll tell you the straight of it.”

It was the flat rock which they had reached. The shouts of the children, the
barking of the dogs and the crying of the baby came to them in one
indistinguishable chorus from across the small flat. In the deepening dusk
they would not be noticed and interrupted.

“Away back, before I was born,” Peter began, “Jess had mining claims here.
Placer, and he was doing pretty well at it, I imagine. He bached here beside
the river, and an idea came to him one day that has stuck to him like a burr
ever since. That idea, boy, has ruled this bunch, has driven us like dogs.
It’s a big one--the only big idea he ever had, so far as I know.

“Old Jess got to thinking how much gold must lie at the bottom of the river,
washed down through all the centuries of time, through Colorado, even through
Wyoming, where its main tributaries rise. When you think of it, the thing gets
hold of you. And the more you think, the stronger it holds. He thought how
tremendously rich and powerful he’d be if he could just get at that gold out
there. But you see the old river; she holds what she’s got. And in flood
time--

“Well, it wasn’t long before he began to figure out how he could get at that
gold. And he got the idea of throwing a dam across the canyon here, and
backing up the water. I don’t think he ever told any one, but he kind of
quizzed around and decided finally that it would cost a lot of money. A
million dollars, we made it at a rough guess. So he began to save his gold,
instead of gambling and carousing with it down in El Dorado and at the fort.
For that matter, I believe the old man always was a grasping, avaricious
individual. It’s his nature--I’ve seen it demonstrated all my life.

“We’re all living fairly decently now, son. But until I was old enough to
assert myself a bit, he almost starved us, he was so keen on saving that
million. Even now I have to have a run-in with him, every so often, about the
money that goes for living expenses. But he can afford it. He’s got his
million, and then some.”

“_What?_”

“He’s been saving every grain he could scrape together, for fifty years,
Rawley. And it’s a good claim--group of claims, rather. No one in the country
has ever dreamed that we’ve done more than scratch a living here. Some day,
when your arm is well, I’ll show you. Yes, he has his million.

“For a long time, now--several years--we’ve been getting ready for the dam.
That tunnel you saw is part of the work. When you’re better, I’d like to take
you through our workings and see what we’ve done and what we expect to do.
Maybe you can give us some advice. We’ve had to use our own wits, because we
can’t consult with experts, in the very nature of things. We are not,” he said
cynically, “the only vultures in the world. The country would be black with
them. And when all’s said and done, we have first right. Why, look at El
Dorado! Men sat down there and cursed their luck--and looked straight at the
richest gold mine in the world! This canyon was here, everything was here,
ready for them to go to work and get the gold just as we are going to do. But
nobody thought of it. Sheep--that’s what men are. Not one in a thousand does
any thinking outside the beaten path. Nobody _had_ dammed the river to get the
gold; they had no precedent to follow--no bell wether to show them the way. So
nobody ever thought of the possibility of doing it. Old Jess, I must say, shot
up head and shoulders above the ruck when he conceived the idea. His
avariciousness and dwelling on that one thought all these years have given him
a mental twist. He’d kill any man who seemed to be standing in his way. He’s
gone too far now--he has lived with that air castle too long. But my God,
think what a castle he’s built!” Peter’s voice was vibrant with emotion. Here,
as with Old Jess, was the dream of a lifetime revealed.

“Yes--it’s a tremendous scheme,” Rawley admitted guardedly. “I’m afraid it
won’t work, Uncle Peter. It doesn’t, somehow, seem feasible.”

“Why not?” Peter’s voice challenged him. “Merely because you hadn’t thought of
its feasibility. Nobody thought of it. Why, you’re like all the rest, son. You
can’t think constructively. You must have a precedent to hang onto with one
hand, before you think out into the ocean of unguessed achievements. Fifty
years ago, they would have shut you up in an asylum if you had declared it
possible to telegraph without wires. How was the first telephone hooted? And
history tells us that a large faction of religious people declared that
anesthetics were contrary to the will of God, who meant that men should
suffer.

“When I show you the canyon, back here, and explain to you how we mean to do
it, you’ll have to admit the simplicity of the thing. And that’s it! The very
simplicity of it has prevented men from grasping it.” He laughed scornfully.
“What a to-do about building a dam they make! They must have government
backing, and political wirepulling, and they must fiddle around for years with
hundreds of men building a dam up from bedrock, with cement and stone! Wait
until I show you what _we_ mean to do! Simplest thing in the world--since we
don’t want canals for irrigation and only want to get at the river below. Even
if we did want to divert the water, instead of restraining it only, we could
build our canals just the same, and at our leisure.

“But it’s all desert, above and below. Already I’ve bought any little rancher
out, that might have his land flooded when _we build our dam_.” Peter laughed
again triumphantly. “I’ll arrange to get possession before we’re ready to back
up the water--”

“Will the government allow that?” Rawley’s tone was troubled. So great a hold
had Peter’s argument taken upon him that he found himself _fearing_ that the
government might object.

Peter gave a contemptuous snort. “Give us a chance to rake the gold out of the
river bed below here, and we can pay whatever fine or indemnity the government
may see fit to levy,” he retorted. “But why should it object? We’ll be saving
the folks away down below here a lot of trouble and loss from high water.
They’ve been howling for flood control ever since the Imperial Valley began to
be settled. The dams they’ve got don’t answer the problem. Sooner or later,
the government, or somebody, will have to put a dam in the river, up this way.
They will be mighty grateful, I should say, if we do it at our own expense
while they’re talking about it.

“Then, if they want to, they can pay us for our trouble and go ahead and build
their canals, or power plants, or whatever they want. All we want is the gold
that has been washed down during a few thousand years.” He lifted his arm and
pointed down to where the river could dimly be seen moiling and grumbling over
its rocky bed.

“You see how rocky it is? Figure for yourself what a perfect trap for gold
every bowlder makes! And there is gold! You don’t deny that, do you?”

“Why, no. I can’t deny the very probable presence of gold in considerable
quantity.” This being rather in the nature of a professional question, Rawley
instinctively leaned toward conservatism in his reply.

“Well, that’s our object. We feel it’s going to be worth the expense of
building the dam. Other people may possibly want to make use of our dam, when
they see it. In that case, we should be able to get back at least what money
we are going to put into it. We’ll know, to a dollar. Nevada has got the
education and training the rest of us lack and can tell us at a minute’s
notice just what the work is costing us. That’s her job. And Old Jess has
signed a contract with us three. The idea was his in the first place, and the
claims that produced the gold to do the work with are his--most of them. He
gets half of all the gold we take out. We repay, out of our share, one-half
the expense of building the dam, and the three of us share equally in the
rest. In other words--I suppose I’ve put it clumsily--he takes half the net
proceeds, we divide the other half. And since we inherit, at his death, we are
all satisfied.” He stood up and smiled down at Rawley in the half darkness of
early night.

“So you see, son, why I won’t need any of that gold you and the Injun are
looking for. I expect to be pretty well fixed myself, before so very long.”




CHAPTER FIFTEEN

THE LAND OF SPLENDID DREAMS


For days Rawley watched the might of the rushing Colorado and wondered at the
temerity of men who would calmly plan to check its headlong progress to the
sea. A splendid dream, he was compelled to own; a dream worthy a better man
than old Jess Cramer. But every man must have one vision of great things
during his life, else he would lack the spark of immortality. He may distort
the vision to baser depths, but to each life is given one dream, one glimpse
into the realm of beautiful possibilities. So Jess Cramer had dreamed his
dream, had seen his vision, and had held aside the curtain so that others
might see.

It interested Rawley in his days of helplessness to observe the reactions of
that dream upon the diverse natures that dwelt within the basin. Old Jess
Cramer had become a vulture in human form, his whole soul enslaved by the
greed fostered by his individual conception of the vision. Rawley could look
at the river and picture Old Jess down in its slimy bed of mud bars, rocks and
groping streamlets, wildly scrabbling amongst the gravel and stones for the
gold his insatiable soul craved. He pictured Old Jess gloating over his gold,
weighing it in his hands, stupidly goggling without the wit to give it for
what pleasures his spent old life could still enjoy.

Young Jess, too, had pulled the splendid vision down to his dull
understanding. Young Jess, low-browed, sullen, would like to throw the gold
with both hands into the lap of brutish gratifications. Young Jess was a
gambler by nature, Rawley gleaned. He must never be let loose in a town,
because he would have to be hauled out in a drunken torpor, his pockets empty,
his credit strained, his soul fresh blotted by vice. Young Jess had “sprees”;
from Gladys Rawley learned that. So Young Jess was kept on a leash of family
watchfulness.

“When we make our big clean-up,” Gladys confided from the bench on the
screened porch, her baby nursing desultorily in its sleep, “Jess has gotta
give me half of his share fast as he rakes it in. I’m going to have Peter
see’t he does that--or we’ll be broke ag’in in no time. I’m going to put it
where he can’t git his fingers on it to gamble, you bet! And he runs with
women--that sure makes the money fly! But I guess they’ll be two of us, at
that!” she tittered. “I ain’t so old yet I can’t git up some speed--give me
some decent clothes and di’mon’s. I’m going to Salt Lake, an’ I’m going to
have me the biggest car they is on the market. My folks is got a car, down to
Needles--”

Anita,--Rawley was long in learning what was Anita’s bright, particular
vision. One day he asked her outright, since he could not lead her to talk
about her expectations in a general way. And straightway he was humbled and
ashamed.

Anita looked at him stolidly, turned her great bulk and stared down at the
river hurrying by in the midday sunlight. She lifted a hand to her eyes and
stared out from beneath the flat of her brown palm.

“Gol’--if it can buy me back--t’ings I have love’--t’ings I have los’ long
time ago,” she murmured. “Gol’--it don’t buy young body--pretty face--voice to
sing like a bird. Gol’ don’t give back my girl--modder of Nevada. Pah-h!” She
spat at the river contemptuously. “W’at I care for gol’?”

Nevada,--to her the dream was a splendid vision indeed. To her it was
achievement--success--the open door through which she might pass to a
glorified future. Nevada, when pressed, admitted that she loved pretty
things--“And then, the world is so full of people who want to be helped!”

Rawley nodded. “I know. I’ve felt that.”

“And if there is gold to be had, so that they can be helped, I think it’s
wicked not to use every ounce of energy we possess to get it, so that we can
use it,” she declared with more enthusiasm than Rawley had ever seen her show.
“When it’s fought for, just for sake of self-indulgence, it ought to be fought
for in the interests of good. I’d found a home for--well, almost anybody that
needed it. And I want so to travel, Fifth Cousin! I don’t mean to spend more
than two or three millions, just myself. I’m afraid I might grow reckless and
extravagant. So I shall only hold out three million, at the most, for my own
personal needs. The rest I shall give away.” Whereupon she laughed at him.

“You don’t really expect to be a lady billionaire?” Nevada sobered. “It’s such
a big, untamed land,” she dreamed aloud, her young eyes on the river, as
Anita’s had been. “If you don’t dream splendidly, you somehow feel that you’re
too small for the desert. It’s a land of splendid visions, Fifth Cousin. Never
mind if they don’t come true. They’re like the sunsets and the sunrises. They
live, and they die, and they live again, on and on--forever.” She lifted a
tanned, rounded arm and pointed away to the floating, hazy blue of the
horizon.

“That’s what I mean,” she said. “Can you look at that and think small? Why,
every old prospector who follows a burro along the desert trail has his
visions. The dim distances promise him heart’s desire. Why else would he keep
going? He’s a millionaire--in his dreams. The next gulch may change his vision
to reality. Think how the Spaniards came dreaming up this very river, as long
ago as when Washington was praying for boots at Valley Forge! What brought
them, but the splendid dreams--their visions of what lay over the next hill?”

Her gaze dropped to the river. Just as every other adult member of the Cramer
family looked at the hurrying water, so Nevada gazed and saw--not lost youth
and lost love, as did Anita, but the splendid future that would be hers when
the river gave up its hoarded gold. She smiled and forgot to speak. Her vision
held her entranced.

Peter’s dream was very like Nevada’s. Peter, as Rawley knew, exulted over the
achievement itself; the constructive thinking that left the beaten path of
thought and plunged boldly into the realm of unguessed possibilities. The
taming of a river that called itself untamable meant more to Peter than to
Nevada, even. The gold would be his just reward for having dared to achieve
the improbable.

Peter also craved emancipation from the petty round of his isolated life.
Around the world Peter would sail and learn of other lands and other peoples
and the problems which Fate had set them to solve. Peter was willing to divert
a part of his gold to the welfare of his fellow men, but he did not dream of
that as did Nevada. The building of the dam, the actual getting of the gold,
the splendid hazards of the undertaking, these things set Peter’s indigo-blue
eyes alight with the flame of his enthusiasm.

So even the tribe of Cramer dreamed, each according to the quality of his
soul. And Rawley knew why his Uncle Peter stayed and worked
shoulder-to-shoulder with men whose half-relationship humiliated and
embittered him. He knew why Nevada chose to remain here, in an environment
ludicrously unsuitable, inharmonious. Indian and white, they held, in various
forms, the same vision. There was something fine, something splendid in their
even daring to dream.




CHAPTER SIXTEEN

RAWLEY INVESTIGATES


Came a time when Rawley felt fit enough for work; and this investigation of
the wild, improbable scheme of the Cramers would be work, with every faculty
of the engineer on the alert for his clients. For the others he would not have
attempted the thing he contemplated. He would have told them, more or less
politely but nevertheless firmly, that the whole thing was out of his line and
that he could not assume the responsibility. But for his Uncle Peter and for
Nevada he would do the best that was in him.

Old Jess and Young Jess still looked at him with suspicious eyes, but they
made no comment when he set off one morning with Peter to look over their
work. They followed sullenly along the trail, ready, Rawley thought, to turn
at the slightest indication of treachery and pitch him over the edge of the
cliff--if they could--as Old Jess had naïvely suggested to Peter.

Back to the tunnel Peter led him,--and within it. It was smaller than the
usual mine tunnel, and fifty feet back from the portal two crosscuts ran
parallel with the face of the cliff for a distance of fifty feet in either
direction. In the hard rock, working with hand drills, the excavations had
been made at the expense of infinite labor, Rawley could see. No car or track
was there for removing the muck, which had been taken out in a wheelbarrow. At
the face of the tunnel, a winze had been sunk fifty feet, and from this two
other crosscuts extended, apparently directly beneath the upper ones.

Rawley saw it all, riding down the winze in the bucket, since he had but one
arm of any use. With Uncle Peter at the windlass he felt perfectly
secure--though he would have refused the descent with one of the others, so
great was his distrust of the Cramers, father and son.

When he returned, Peter conducted him down the stairway hewn into the cliff,
and into the big launch.

“This is something we don’t let the world know about,” he remarked. “From
Nelson we pack in supplies that any ordinary miner’s family would need--if
they were just scratching a living out of their claims. You saw how we do
it--with burros. Fifteen years ago we began to work on that stairway and
landing. It was a long, hard job. But I knew that we were going to need some
private way of getting supplies and material in for the dam. Now, we can slip
down to Needles and get a boat-load and get back without these people around
here knowing it. Early morning, just at peep of day, is the time I choose for
running in here. On the far side of the river, none of the El Dorado
prospectors would be apt to notice; and if they did, they would think I was on
my way farther north. Now, I’m going to take you across the canyon.”

Once out and fighting the current, Rawley saw at once why it was that the
Colorado was not considered a navigable river. There were no rapids in the
canyon, properly speaking. But the pent volume of water rushed through like a
dignified mill race, and it was only Peter’s skill and the power of the motor
that landed them across the canyon.

Here, a small eddy, with a break in the bold, granite wall, made a fair
landing. Peter tied the launch securely and led the way up a steep trail from
the water’s edge to a natural shelf, where another tunnel with crosscuts was
being run. As far as the contour of the cliffs would permit, the workings here
were identical with those on the home shore, except that they were not
finished. They had just completed the winze.

“We can’t work over here except when the weather and the river are favorable,”
Peter explained. “And Old Jess kept us at the gold diggings until we balked.
He’d got that one idea so firmly fixed in his mind that he wouldn’t let up
when he had his million. He seemed to think a few months’ work would put the
dam in, and it was next to impossible to pry him away from the gold grubbing.
When we finally struck and refused to put in another shift in the mine, he
yielded the point. Now he’s in a fever to get this done. He’ll sit and watch
the river by the hour, just as you saw him that night he came down on us.
Gloats and grudges by turns, I suppose. He doesn’t realize what a job it
is--blowing enough rock into the canyon to dam the river.”

“I wonder if you do, yourself!” Rawley remarked laconically and led the way
out. “I want to study these cliffs a bit from the outside. I’ve seen enough of
your underground work.”

He spent two hours sitting on first one jutting rock pinnacle and then
another, studying the cliffs and making sketchy diagrams and notes. A splendid
dream, surely; but a dream wellnigh impossible, as he saw it.

That evening after supper, he sent word to Peter that he was ready to talk to
him and would prefer to have the Cramers present. Wherefore Peter brought them
over to the cabin; Old Jess vulture-like and grim, and fairly bristling with
suspicion, Young Jess surly, but wanting to know what was going on between
Peter and this stranger. Rawley dragged chairs out to the porch and laid a
diagram sketch on the small table beside him.

“I want to say first, to all of you,” he began gravely, “that I don’t approve
of the scheme from any point of view. Peter says that is because I think by
rule; because the thing has never been done, and I therefore have nothing to
work from. However that may be, I warn you at the start that I don’t like it.
I don’t believe you can dam the river in the way you are going at it. It’s a
cinch you will have to alter your plans in certain ways, if you are to have
any hope whatever of accomplishing the feat.

“I want to warn you that the government will probably have something to say
about your performance. If the river had not been declared unnavigable, you
would be in trouble for obstructing the channel, if for nothing else. What
Washington will say about it in the circumstances, I can’t predict. I don’t
know. But if you persist in carrying out your scheme, be prepared for trouble
with the authorities. Red tape may wind you up tighter than you anticipate.

“With the understanding, then, that I absolutely disapprove of the idea, I am
going to give you my opinion of the most feasible method of making it a
success. Of course, I needn’t point out to you the very obvious fact that, if
you don’t make a success of it, you will lose every dollar you put into it,
and probably get into trouble just the same. If you spend a fortune throwing
rock into the river and fail to dam the flow so that you can carry on whatever
operations you have in mind on the river bed below, you will be worse off than
if you had not started. Therefore, I’m going to tell you how I think you
should do it.”

“In other words, ‘Don’t do it--but if you _do_ do it, do it this way,’” Nevada
murmured mischievously.

“Something like that,” Rawley grinned. “In the first place, your work is far
from finished. You will have to put in relievers, to break the rock between
your crosscuts and the face. That can be done by raising, or you can sink
incline shafts from the surface. My diagram here shows approximately what I
mean. Later, when my arm is well, I will, if you like, run your lines for you.
I have a small instrument for my own use.

“These relievers must be shot with dynamite, of course. I suppose, having had
long experience in mining, you know that you should use some dynamite for
breaking the rock, and black powder to lift and heave it over into the river.
Since dynamite gives a quick concussion, the whole can be fired
simultaneously; the black powder will follow the dynamite.

“What you should have, of course, is the advice of expert engineers who
specialize in this sort of thing. It’s out of my line, and I am merely giving
you my opinion for whatever it is worth--in soundness,” he added, catching a
miserly chill in Old Jess’s eyes. “I couldn’t sell advice on a matter outside
my profession, and in any case I am glad to do whatever I can to help you
avoid mistakes. I am trying to see it as a mining problem--the opening of a
glory hole, we’ll say.

“Your idea of crosscutting at different levels is a good one, but you should
by all means break your rock to the surface, and so give your main explosives
a chance to lift it over. You see what I mean?” He lifted the diagram and held
it up for them to see. “Here are your tunnel, winze and crosscuts. Then here
are your relievers. An incline to the surface--or close to the surface--as
high as you wish the cliff to break. I shall have to survey that for you, to
give you the proper pitch. Then these ‘coyote holes’ between the apex and your
adit--these will be filled with dynamite. I wonder if you have formed any
definite idea of how much powder and dynamite you are going to need!”

“Nevada and I have been working on that for five years,” Peter said, and
smiled. “We intend to use plenty.”

“I should hope so,” Rawley exclaimed. “Better a few tons too much, than to
have all your work and money go for nothing. Make a dead-sure job of it,
or--drop the scheme right here.”

This brought an ominous growl from the old man and Young Jess. Peter was
studying the diagram. He passed it along to Young Jess, who scowled down at it
intently, his slower mind studying each detail laboriously. Old Jess reached
out a grimy claw and bent over it like a vulture over a half-picked bone.

“I’m afraid you’ll have trouble getting your explosives,” Rawley observed.
“The war is taking enormous quantities to Europe. And I’m afraid we’re going
to be dragged into the scrap ourselves. In which case, the government will
probably shut off private buyers entirely.”

Young Jess laughed a coarse guffaw. “We should worry!” He leered at Rawley.
“We got a glory hole a’ready, back at the diggin’s. We been five years gittin’
powder in here. Gosh! We c’d blow up Yerrup if we wanted to, ourselves!
Y’ain’t showed him our powder cache, have yuh, Pete?”

“I didn’t know anything about that. It isn’t necessary that I should,” Rawley
broke in impatiently. “My concern is merely the engineering problem you’ve got
on your hands. As to the details and the means of putting the idea into
execution, I’m not sure that I want to know. I might be hauled up as a
witness, sometime--and what I don’t know I won’t have to lie about.”

“That’s right. That’s the way to talk,” Young Jess approved. The diagram had
evidently impressed him considerably. He stared at Rawley from under his
heavy, lowering brows. Though he spoke as any illiterate white man of the West
would speak, he looked like a full-blooded Indian. Rawley wondered which side
of him did the thinking,--if any. The worst of both sides, he guessed
shrewdly.

“We ain’t tellin’ more’n we’re obleeged to tell,” Old Jess grumbled, lifting
his greedy old eyes from the sketch. “We ain’t sharin’, neither! You’re eatin’
my grub--two of ye--”

“Grandfather!” Nevada sprang up and faced the old man furiously. “How can you
dare! Have you forgotten that Mr. Rawlins and his partner saved my life and
Grandmother’s? Oh, what a groveling lot of brute beasts we have become!”

“Mr. Rawlins is my affair,” Peter said sternly, catching Nevada’s hand as she
would have passed him and pulling her down to his knee. “I brought him here.
He is doing this work for me. You two will profit by it, though it will not
cost you so much as a crust of bread. Nevada is right, except that you strike
me as being more like vultures. All you think of is what lies at the bottom of
the river.

“The bigness of the achievement, the real significance of a lifetime’s
devotion to one tremendous demonstration of man’s dominion over nature means
less than nothing to you two. I asked Rawlins to look over our work and advise
us. He’s doing it. It’s only by courtesy that you two were called in to hear
what he has to say. It’s out of friendship for _me_ that he’s going on with
his study of the problems we have to solve.

“Why, damn you,” he flared out suddenly--for all the world like King, of the
Mounted--“you couldn’t hire this man to do for you what he’s doing for me for
nothing!”




CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

CHANGED RELATIONS


Young Jess and Old Jess exchanged sidelong glances. Young Jess turned his head
away from the group and spat out a quid of tobacco on to the porch floor,
whereat Nevada frowned her disgust.

“Yeah--we know all about him doin’ it fer _you_,” he leered. He eyed the two
through half-closed lids. “You played it slick, but not slick enough. When yuh
thought up a name fer him, Pete, you’d oughta stuck to it, ’stid of changin’
your mind first day he was here. Gladys knows. He told Nevada one name, an’
you come along and changed it on him.

“Look at ’im, Dad! D’ yuh ever see father an’ son look more alike in your
life? By--, you can’t make a fool outa me, Pete, nor outa Gladys. Why don’t
yuh own up? _We_ know you’re his daddy. You can’t claim to me an’ Gladys you
never throwed in with no woman! Not with that face, right there, callin’ you a
liar!”

Nevada started, and Peter’s arm around her tightened restrainingly. She did
not speak, although her lips parted in astonishment. She looked at Rawley and
met his eyes fixed upon her questioningly. Nevada flushed and turned away her
face, hiding it against Peter’s cheek.

“Why didn’t you tell me, Uncle Peter?” she whispered chidingly. “You could
have trusted me--you know you could.”

Peter’s arm tightened again. His face was turned toward the Cramers. His lips
were drawn up a bit at the corners in a smile, but his eyes were hard.

“Well, and what of it?” he asked calmly. “Suppose he _is_ my son--what then?”

Young Jess was prying off a fresh chew of tobacco from a half-plug that filled
his palm.

“Nothin’, I guess. Only I want yuh to know we’re wise to you. You mighta come
out with it, ’stid of lyin’ and beatin’ about the bush, that’s all. Any fool
can see you two’re close related. I seen it first thing, and so did Gladys.”

“Is it anybody’s business, besides his and mine?” Peter’s voice was still
calm, though it boded ill for Young Jess if he did not watch his tongue.

“Can’t say as it is,” Young Jess admitted. “Mebby his mother might think it
was _her_ business--whoever she is.”

“Leave my mother out of this,” Rawley cried hotly. “She’s not--”

“Aw, what the hell do I care?” Young Jess rose and hitched up his sagging
breeches. “Yuh can’t fool me--that’s all. And I will say I ain’t afraid to
have yuh go ahead and look the works over. My own _nephew_ wouldn’t
double-cross his paw’s family, I guess.”

He left them, turning his head once to grin knowingly over his shoulder. Old
Jess mumbled a general curse on all family ties, or anything that would
interfere with his getting the gold out of the river, and followed. Ten steps
away he saw what he believed to be a joke and went off cackling, “Pete’s own
son! he-he!”

Nevada shivered and pulled herself free from her Uncle Peter’s arms. Her lips
were pressed rather firmly together, and she avoided looking at either of the
men.

“Well, you were the first to notice the likeness, Nevada,” Peter reminded her
banteringly.

“And you were the first to--no, my _cousin_ was the first to lie to me about
it!” Her voice was coldly disapproving. “I’m very sorry--I did think that I
was worthy your full confidence, Uncle Peter. It seems that I have been
mistaken all along. You have only pretended to trust me, and all these
years--though that in itself doesn’t so much matter, since there may have been
good reason for keeping the secret, even from me. But when my--_cousin_ came
here, you must have known immediately who he was, Uncle Peter. It is that
which hurts. You pretended to me that you never had seen him before, and that
you were not quite willing that he should stay. And he--oh, I hate you both!”

Her voice broke quite unexpectedly. She gave an impatient, spurning gesture
and fled.

Peter got out the solacing “makings” of a cigarette. He glanced at Rawley
queerly and gave a cynical smile.

“Talk about the beautiful faith of your own people,” he remarked
philosophically. “Here’s a sample for you. Even Nevada believes right away
that I have lived a double life.”

“It makes it damned awkward--this resemblance,” Rawley muttered ruefully.
“Young Jess ought to have his block knocked off.”

“Dynamite wouldn’t feaze Young Jess,” Peter declared. “He and Gladys have
cooked this up between them. ’Twouldn’t have done any good to deny it, son.
They wouldn’t believe it unless it suited them. And if I convinced them,
they’d want to know more than ever why we look so much alike. Poor old
mother--I was thinking of her. I hope you don’t mind?”

“Not in the way you mean,” Rawley assured him discontentedly. “I only wish you
were my father. That is, I would if-- I hate to have Nevada feel that we both
lied to her,” he blurted helplessly.

For once, Uncle Peter was dense. He laughed quietly to himself.

“Oh, she’ll get over that,” he declared easily. “That’s the drop of Spanish
blood. Don’t you worry about that, boy. On the whole, I’m rather relieved.
I’ve caught Young Jess eyeing you; Old Jess, too, and even Gladys noticed, I
think. I was waiting for one of them to mention the resemblance between us. I
was braced for it. I meant to laugh it off, as just their imagination. This
way, they think they have it all accounted for. It does save a good deal of
dangerous speculation. I’m not guessing. I know that Old Jess used to take
spells of jealousy. Anita--mother--has always been afraid of him. When I was
just a kid, I threw up his gun when it was pointed at her heart, and the
quarrel was over your--over my father. Something had brought up the subject,
some chance remark. The Spanish in her flamed up, and she told him that she
loved King. Then he pulled the gun. He may have been drunk--I don’t remember
that part.

“So you see, son, I know why she’s in deadly fear of having him find it out.
And there are other reasons why none of them must know. While he and Young
Jess think I’m a Cramer, they will listen to me. I can keep things straight
here. If they knew the truth, I’d probably have to leave.” He lighted the
cigarette, and Rawley watched his face revealed for a moment by the flare of
the match.

“Boy,” he went on, turning toward Rawley, “I’ve got to stay. I’ve grown up,
I’ve spent my whole life dreaming of the dam. It isn’t what we’ll get out of
it, altogether, though it’s human and natural to want the gold, too. It’s the
_dam_. I’ve planned and worked for it so long. I’ve got to see it go through.”

He smoked and meditated for awhile, staring down at the river, always slipping
past him, always in a hurry to meet the tides; to mingle its mountain water
with the salt of the ocean.

“I saw two men drown out there, once.” He waved a hand toward the river. “I’d
like to stop it running, just to show it who’s master here.” Another silence,
and then he looked at Rawley. “You don’t mind being thought my son?” There was
a wistfulness in his tone. “If I thought you minded--”

Rawley shook himself out of his mood. He leaned forward and forced himself to
smile at Peter.

“I don’t mind, at all,” he lied. “I hate to have Nevada think that I
deliberately lied to her because I was ashamed of any such relationship.
I--want to keep her confidence and respect--”

Strange words for the leaden depression that had come over him at her anger,
but he was fairly sincere in their employment. He believed--because he was
forcing himself to believe--that he merely liked Nevada very much, and admired
her, and was anxious to preserve the friendly relations into which they had
drifted. It amused him to be called “Fifth Cousin” in that whimsical tone she
used for the term. He thrilled a little whenever she reminded him thus of the
make-believe relationship. To be called her cousin was somehow quite
different. There was a chill in the word,--and any young man would rather be
thrilled than chilled by a girl as beautiful, mentally and physically, as was
Nevada.

“I’ll tell her you didn’t know you were my son,” Peter was calmly planning
aloud. “She’ll believe it, if I tell her so. I have never lied to Nevada in my
life. She’ll believe whatever I tell her about this affair. She’s bound to.”
He chuckled under his breath, still blinded by his relief at the attitude his
family had taken. “A reputation for honesty comes in handy, sometimes!”

“You don’t think, then, that it would be wise to tell Nevada the straight of
it?” In spite of himself, Rawley spoke constrainedly. He wanted to appear
nonchalant, even amused, but he knew that he was betraying himself to any man
who chanced to observe him.

“I don’t. The truth is not our secret, boy. It belongs to a silent, sad old
woman who never speaks what’s in her heart and so is not considered as having
any feelings. Do you think the taint of Indian relations will do you the
slightest harm? Tell me honestly.”

“No. I’m young, but I have made a certain name for myself for all that. I have
the name of never having been bought and never leaving a job until I have the
correct data. My clients have never yet inquired into my personal affairs.
They never will. They know I’m an American; that’s about all that counts,
these days, so far as your blood ties go.”

“There isn’t one chance in fifty that this will ever be known, even in this
district. We keep to ourselves. The old man has made it plain, ever since I
can remember, that he doesn’t want his neighbors to come around the place. If
you inquire amongst the miners and prospectors, you will hear that we are a
tough outfit and best let alone. It is believed, as I told you, that we’re
just a bunch of breeds digging out a little gold--enough to support us. Dad’s
a half-crazy squaw-man, and Young Jess is mighty unpopular. Whatever business
must be taken care of outside, I attend to myself. Or Nevada sometimes does it
for me. She never talks with people except when it’s necessary. Whenever she
goes to Nelson, or to Las Vegas, my mother goes with her.

“Nevada would not mention the matter, in any case, but I must ask you not to
tell her. Mother is almost uncanny at reading faces. She’d see at once that we
had told the girl. She worships Nevada. It would break her heart if she saw
that Nevada knew her secret. She’s afraid of Old Jess, but that’s partly
because of what it would mean to the girl. She thinks Nevada would despise her
for the sin of her youth. That’s the way she put it, and there’s this about an
Indian: You can’t pry an idea out of their minds, once it’s firmly planted.
Poor old mother broods over these things. She feels as if Nevada is her one
hope of heaven, almost. To keep that girl pure and sweet is her religion. I
promised her, by everything that she called sacred, that Nevada should never
know; at least, not so long as her grandmother lives. So that’s why,” he
finished gently, “I’m pleased at the turn it’s taken. I don’t mind anything
they may hatch up about me, if it will protect poor old mother.”

Rawley felt humbled. He remembered how old Anita had spat her contempt of the
gold that could not buy her the things she had loved,--and lost. In that
gross, shapeless body, who could say how fine a soul might be hidden?

“It’s all right,” he said, after a minute. “I’ll have to warn Johnny Buffalo,
and then I’ll adopt you for my dad, if you like. I can see how it simplifies
matters here. But I’m afraid Nevada never will forgive--”

“Oh, she’ll be proud of her new cousin, once she recovers from the shock of
not being told first thing,” Peter assured him gratefully. “I’m afraid I’ve
spoiled that girl.”




CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

THE JOHNNY BUFFALO UPRISING


Johnny Buffalo was on the warpath. Figuratively speaking, he was brandishing
the tomahawk over the tribe of Cramer. The gods he worshiped had been
blasphemed, the altar upon which he laid the gifts of his soul had been
defiled.

In other words, Johnny Buffalo had lain in his bed and listened while Young
Jess and his father jibed at Johnny Buffalo’s two idols, in whose veins flowed
the blood of his beloved sergeant. The blood of the Kings might not be made a
mockery while Johnny Buffalo could lift one arm to fight. When Rawley returned
to him, he was discovered out of his bed, braced against a table and trying
unsuccessfully to load the old King rifle which he had first used to kill
Mohaves on that day, fifty years ago, when King, of the Mounted, received the
shot that changed his whole life.

The old Indian was shaking with weakness, but his eyes blazed with the war
spirit of his tribe.

“They are dogs of Pahutes!” he exclaimed, when Rawley entered the room. “They
would drag the virtue of good men in the mud. They shall retract. They shall
know the truth! Or I shall kill.”

With three long steps Rawley was beside him, his hand on the rifle barrel,
touching the trembling, sinewy hand of Johnny Buffalo. But the old man would
not yield the gun. His eyes neither softened nor lowered themselves before the
steadfast blue eyes that were the heritage of the Kings.

“You better get back to bed,” Rawley warned him, half-laughing. “If Peter
comes and finds you up, there’ll be the devil and all to pay. I guess we won’t
massacre anybody, Johnny,--at least not to-night.”

“I heard the half-breed make a mock of Peter and of you. I heard him say that
Peter is your father. When he said that, he laughed. His laugh was evil. Now
he shall kneel upon his knees and beg the forgiveness of Peter and of you. He
shall say that he spoke a lie from his black heart that would like to see
others vile, because he is vile. If he does not say that he lied, I shall kill
him. And that half-breed cousin, Anita, shall own her sin and her son. It is
not good that Peter should be thought the son of that old vulture, when we
know that he is the son of my sergeant. He is not your father. He is your
uncle. I will tell them so, and we will see then if they laugh!”

If unshakable dignity can rave, then Johnny Buffalo was raving. Rawley tried
again to take the rifle gently from the Indian’s grasp; but the brown fingers
seemed to have grown fast to the barrel. Rawley hated to do it, but his word
had been given to Peter and this unforeseen uprising must be quelled; he
therefore took Johnny Buffalo firmly by the shot shoulder. The old man wilted
in his grasp. Rawley leaned the rifle against the table and helped Johnny
Buffalo back to his bed.

Subdued but knowing no surrender, Johnny Buffalo lay glaring up at Rawley,
even while his lips were twisted with pain. With a singularly motherly motion,
Rawley adjusted the pillows and smoothed the sheet.

“That’s a nice way to act--start out gunning for my adopted family the minute
I get one!” he scolded with mock severity. “Can’t leave you a minute but you
jump the reservation and go on the warpath. And here I thought you were
civilized!”

He grinned, but in Johnny Buffalo’s eyes the fire did not die. His thin, old
lips would not soften to a smile. The immobility of his face reminded Rawley
of what his Uncle Peter had just said about Indians: that it is impossible to
pry an idea out of their minds, once it is firmly fixed there. Nevertheless,
he sat down beside the bed and repeated to Johnny Buffalo all that Peter had
said concerning Young Jess’s charge. He was wise enough, however, to refrain
from any attempt to rouse sympathy in Johnny’s heart for that pathetic
culprit, Anita. Rather, he flattered himself by declaring that Peter was
pleased because the tribe of Cramer believed him Rawley’s father, and he
emphasized the need of protecting Peter’s influence over the two men, and his
and Nevada’s interest in the river gold. The mocking laughter of Young Jess,
he declared, was not worthy a second thought.

It took Rawley just three hours to bring about an unconditional surrender to
Peter’s wishes in the matter. Even so, Rawley went to his own bed fagged but
feeling that he had done pretty well, considering Johnny Buffalo’s first
intention. But as an indemnity to the old man’s pride, Rawley had faithfully
promised that he would get their camp outfit up from its hiding place on the
morrow, and that he would pitch their tent as far as was practicable from the
tribe of Cramer. Johnny Buffalo, it appeared, would not attempt to hold
himself responsible for what might happen if he were compelled to listen to
further inanities from Gladys, or to hear the voices of Old Jess or Young Jess
or Anita. Nevada he very kindly excepted from the general condemnation of the
tribe. And Peter, of course, was a King. He therefore could do no wrong,--in
the eyes of Johnny Buffalo.

It was a secret relief to Rawley that the change could be placed in the form
of a concession to the Indian’s pride. His own pride was demanding that he
should move under his own canvas roof and eat the bread--so to speak--of his
own buying. He had never felt quite right about taking Nevada’s cabin. He
happened to know that their occupancy had forced her to many little
makeshifts. Then the jibe of Old Jess had made his position as a guest
intolerable, in spite of the quick championship of Nevada and Peter. He had
felt obliged to consider, however, Johnny Buffalo’s welfare. The old man was
not recovering as quickly as he should. Rawley had felt constrained to stay on
his account; but now it seemed likely that a change to their own tent would
really be beneficial. He had not dreamed that Johnny Buffalo’s Indian pride
had been daily martyred by the presence of Anita and Gladys.

“The scion of chiefs,” Johnny Buffalo had declaimed bitterly, “should not be
forced to become a companion of the squaws. Anita knows the etiquette of our
tribe. Yet she would humiliate me by forcing me to listen to her chatter. Bah!
I am not a squaw, nor a lover of squaws. Take me to our camp, my son. There I
need not submit to the indignity of their presence.”

So the next morning, when Peter stopped by the porch for a minute on his way
to work, Rawley told him honestly what it was that he and Johnny Buffalo had
burned a light so late the night before to discuss. Peter seemed to understand
and offered the burros and Nevada for his service. Rawley grinned over the
manner in which Peter had made the offer, but he made no comment. The burros
and Nevada would be very acceptable, he said.

“I had a talk with Nevada last night,” Peter added. “You’ll find she’s all
over her temper. And she knows all the good camping places between here and El
Dorado. You couldn’t stay down there in the canyon; it’s too hot. There are
places, like this basin, where the breeze strikes most of the day. I want you
close. I’ll have Nevada show you a place down the river, on one of my claims.
I don’t suppose you’ll object to camping on my land, will you?”

Rawley would not, and he said so. And after breakfast he started out with
Nevada, following the two burros which went nipping down the river under empty
packsaddles. There seemed to be certain advantages in becoming a cousin of
Nevada, Rawley discovered. Their chaperonage had been practically abandoned;
they were accompanied by the burros and only one dog. The trailing cloud of
young Cramers were sharply called off by Aunt Gladys, and Nevada drove the
other dogs back with rather accurately aimed stones. Anita, for some reason
which Rawley was not sufficiently acute to fathom, failed altogether to put in
an appearance. It was the first time since Rawley came into the basin that
Nevada prepared to set off without her grandmother.

Nevada, in her high-laced boots, khaki breeches and white shirt open at the
throat, walked with her easy stride down the faint trail behind the burros.
Rawley followed her, wondering man-fashion what thoughts she was thinking, how
she felt about him, whether she was glad to be setting out like this with him
for trail partner instead of her grandmother, and what she thought of him as a
cousin.

He was not a particularly shy young man; there was too much of his grandfather
in his make-up not to have had certain little romantic adventures of his own.
He would have told you, with a bit of cynicism in his tone, that he knew girls
and that they were all alike. But he was beginning to discover that he did not
know Nevada Macalister. Now that he seemed to have become irrevocably her
cousin by diplomacy and tribal belief, he was disposed to make what use he
could of the relationship. But after half a mile of traveling with no more
than an occasional monosyllable for Nevada’s contribution to the conversation,
Rawley was compelled to admit to himself that the cousin business was not
working as he would like to have it.

In view of her emotional outbreak last night, Rawley could not quite bring
himself to the point of asking her outright how she liked her new cousin. But
the question kept tickling his tongue, nevertheless. Then he reflected that
Nevada was rather generously supplied with cousins, none of them definitely
desirable. From that thought it was only a short jump to the next inevitable
conclusion. Nevada, he decided, had placed him mentally alongside those other
pestiferous cousins, the offspring of Gladys and Young Jess. Or if she had
not, she was surely according him the same treatment.

As a romantic chapter in their acquaintance, the trip was a flat failure.
Nevada was businesslike,--and aloof. Rawley’s faint hope that some unforeseen
incident would occur to shock Nevada out of her insouciant mood died of
inanition. The camp outfit they found exactly as it had been left, except that
a rat had rashly decided to make a nest in a fold of the wrapped tent. This
did not seem to interest Nevada in the slightest degree. She helped him with
the packing and did not seem to care whether he hurt his newly healed arm or
not. They returned as they had gone,--Nevada silent, following the burros that
plodded sedately homeward under their loads, Rawley trailing after her in
complete discouragement over the rebuffs his friendly overtures had received.

They did not so much as see a rattlesnake.




CHAPTER NINETEEN

THE EAGLE STRIKES


The month of inaction which followed fretted Johnny Buffalo nearly as much as
the companionship of the squaws had done. In his boyhood he had been trained
to serve his sergeant. For fifty years that service had been uninterrupted by
ill health or accident. It irked him now to lie idle and watch Rawley burn his
fingers on the handle of the frying pan, or wash the dishes from which Johnny
Buffalo had been fed.

The long days when Rawley was away with Peter were lonesome. There was nothing
to do but to seek sedulously after comfort, which is so rare a thing in a camp
beside the Colorado in summer that every little whiff of cool breeze is
prized, every little change in the monotonous diet makes an impromptu banquet.
Sometimes Nevada walked down to camp with things she herself had cooked; but
Johnny Buffalo had taken care to insult Gladys and Anita so definitely that
they refused to come near him.

“I am well enough now to walk,” he announced one evening, when he had insisted
upon cooking the supper. “To-day I climbed to the top of that hill. In a sack
on my shoulder I carried a rock that weighed twenty-five pounds. I am well. We
can go now and find the gold.”

“You packed a rock up that hill?” Rawley laid his hands on his hips and
squinted at the hill indicated. “You ought to get sun-struck for that. But if
you think you’re up to it, we can hit the trail to the mountain about day
after to-morrow. I’ll have to drive up to Nelson to-morrow to get more grub
and the mail. You might borrow the burros from Peter and meet me at the mouth
of the canyon. That will save time and give you a chance to try out your
shoulder.”

Johnny Buffalo actually grinned and stepped more briskly than was his normal
gait, as if he would prove himself as spry as any young man of twenty-six.

Thus for ten days they wandered through rocky gorges, and climbed the steep
sides of hills, and returned to their camp for fresh supplies and a day or two
of rest. The “great and high mountain” in the distance had seemed to recede
before them as they walked. They had been three days in reaching its base.
Another two days had served to take them over the top and down on the other
side westward. There their trail seemed to end, for that side of the mountain
was almost entirely covered with loose rubble of decomposed rock. There were
no cliffs or jagged rocks anywhere that they could see.

Since Peter had burned the code, and the list of references was in St. Louis
with Grandfather’s Bible, they were compelled for the present to depend
altogether on memory. But Rawley could repeat the code from beginning to end
without hesitation. The only explanation, then, of their failure was that
either he had made a mistake somewhere in writing down the marked passages or
Grandfather King had marked them wrong.

Rawley astonished Nevada somewhat by asking to borrow her Bible. But when he
received it he could not remember the references, so that he was no better off
than before. One thing was certain: the only great and high mountain within
sight of El Dorado, looking north, with “Cedar trees in abundance scattered
over the face of the high mountain” had no cliffs upon its western side. When
the mountain itself failed to measure up with the description, the whole code
fell flat. It was a big country, and it was a rough country. A man might spend
a lifetime in the search.

“My sergeant did not lie,” Johnny Buffalo contended stubbornly. “He was a
great man. He did not make mistakes. When he said the gold was there, in the
clefts of the jagged rocks, it was there. He said it.”

“He said it--fifty years ago,” Rawley retorted rather impatiently. “I didn’t
see any gold formation anywhere on that mountain. It’s true that ‘Gold is
where you find it’; but it leaves earmarks in its particular neighborhood for
the man who knows how to read the signs. If there is any gold on that
mountain, some one carried it there.”

“There is gold where my sergeant said there is gold,” Johnny Buffalo insisted.
“I shall look until I find.”

“You will need winter quarters, then,” Rawley observed grimly, rummaging for
his sweater. October was hard upon them, and the wind was chill. “Tell you
what, Johnny. I’ll have to get out and earn some more money, anyway. I have a
dandy offer that came in the last mail. It’s a big job, and it ought to net me
a thousand dollars, easy. You remember that spring we passed, back here three
or four miles? It isn’t far from the trail. There’s plenty of wood, and a
little prospecting there might turn up something. I noticed as we came through
that the country looked pretty good. I’ll help build you a cabin there and get
you fixed up for winter. Then I’ll go and report on this mine--and come back,
maybe, after I’m through. Peter’ll see that you have everything you need while
I’m gone.”

Johnny Buffalo nodded approval. “All winter I will hunt for the gold my
sergeant gave you,” he declared. “He said it was on the high mountain. I shall
find it.”

Rawley had long ago learned that argument was a waste of time and breath. All
the while they were building the cabin, Johnny Buffalo talked of finding the
gold while Rawley was gone; and Rawley did not discourage him. He was saving a
secret for the old man, and he was in a hurry to have it complete before he
must leave.

Rawley’s mother had offered for sale the furniture and belongings of the west
wing, and Rawley had surreptitiously bought them for a fair price through the
friendly dealer who had known him since Rawley was a child. The things were
stored ready for shipping. Rawley wrote for them; and on the day when the
truck was to bring them to the end of the road nearest Johnny’s winter
quarters, he encouraged Johnny to start on a two-day trip to the mountain.
Peter and Nevada arrived with the burros before Johnny had much more than
walked out of sight.

Never mind what it cost those three in haste and hard work. When Johnny
Buffalo dragged himself wearily to the cabin at dusk on the second day, he
walked into an atmosphere poignantly familiar. Even the wheel chair had
arrived with the rest of the things. That, however, Rawley had left crated and
stored in the little shed adjoining the cabin. Everything else he had unpacked
and arranged as he had seen them in the west wing.

Peter and Nevada had lingered, waiting for the old man’s return; but after all
they lacked the courage to follow him when he went inside. He was gone a long
while. The three sat out on a rock before the cabin and watched the moon slide
up from behind a jagged peak across the river. They did not talk. Splendid
dreams held them silent,--dreams and their conscious waiting for Johnny
Buffalo.

Even when he came from the cabin there was no speech amongst them; Johnny
Buffalo looked as though he had been talking with angels.

A few days after that, Rawley went away to his work, content because he had
wheedled from Nevada a promise to write to him and keep him informed of Johnny
Buffalo’s welfare and the progress of the dam. He expected to return in a
month. But instead of coming he wrote a long letter.

He had finished the mine report and was about to leave for Washington, he
said. The president of the School of Mines where he had studied wrote him,
asking if he would not offer his services to the government, which was badly
in need of men for research work. Minerals hitherto in little demand had
suddenly become tremendously important,--for while the country was not yet at
war it was quietly preparing for such an emergency. He told Nevada that, much
as he disliked to change his plans, it was too good a chance to pass up, even
if his loyalty to the government did not impel him to accept the tacit offer.
He would come in contact with some of the biggest men in the game, he wrote.

In April, when war was actually declared, Rawley was already thoroughly shaken
down into his job. He still wrote twice a month to Nevada, but his letters
became shorter,--as if they were written in stray minutes snatched from his
duties. An interesting assortment of postmarks Nevada collected during the
ensuing two years. Every State in the Union that could flaunt a mineral
product seemed to be represented. Her replies were usually about two jobs
behind him, so that letters with the Nelson, Nevada, postmark trailed
patiently after Rawley wherever he went.

During the war, his mother saw him just once, when he happened to be passing
through St. Louis and could stop over for a few hours. Johnny Buffalo, Peter,
and Nevada saw him not at all.




CHAPTER TWENTY

NEVADA ANALYZES


On a certain day in June, Rawley left his car at Nelson and started afoot down
the trail to Cramers. Although the war was over he was still in the service of
the government. A bit leaner, a bit harder-muscled, steadier of eye and of
purpose, with a broader vision, too. Rawley had been making good.

After more than two years away from this particular point on the Colorado, old
emotions came sweeping back upon him as he caught sight of this bold peak or
that wild gorge, familiar landmarks along the trail. Halfway to Cramers, he
turned aside and followed a dim trail that went climbing tortuously up a
narrow canyon and so reached a bold hillside where the cabin of Johnny Buffalo
squatted snugly beside the spring.

Johnny was absent,--probably still hunting for the gold, Rawley thought, as he
grinned to himself. After so long a time spent wholly in service to others,
with the weal of his country always in the front of his mind, the search for
his grandfather’s gold mine seemed a shade less important than it had been two
years ago. He had the Bible and the old diary with him, but that was partly to
please Johnny Buffalo and because he thought the books might be interesting to
Peter. For himself he had not much hope of finding the cleft in the rocks; for
Johnny Buffalo the quest would be a wholesome object in life. Johnny Buffalo
would continue the search from no selfish motive, but in a zeal for Rawley’s
welfare. There was a difference, Rawley thought, in the way you go at a thing.

He left a note for Johnny on the table and went on down the hill and back into
the trail to the river. At the edge of the basin he stopped and surveyed the
somewhat squalid huddle of buildings, wondering why it was he felt almost as
if this were a home-coming. Perhaps it was a fondness for his Uncle Peter, and
because Nevada had kept the place fresh in his mind with the letters she had
written him.

Two strange dogs were added to the hysterically barking pack that rushed out
at him as he drew near. Five children instead of four grouped themselves and
stared. Gladys appeared in the open doorway of her cabin; a fatter Gladys,
with another baby riding astride her hip. The tribe of Cramer was waxing
strong.

He was sure that Gladys recognized him, but with the stolidity of the race
which dominated her nature, she merely stared and gave no sign of welcome.
Rawley kicked a dog or two that seemed over-serious in their intentions and
kept straight on. When he reached the hard-trodden zone immediately before the
cabin, he lifted his hat and spoke to Gladys.

“Hullo,” she grinned fatuously. “We don’t see you for a long time.”

Anita came to the door, looked out and nodded with an imperturbable gravity
that always disconcerted Rawley. He asked for Peter and Nevada. Peter was at
work, Gladys told him vaguely. And the clicking of a typewriter in the rock
dugout told him where Nevada might be found.

Rawley was amazed, almost appalled at the agitation with which he faced her.
In the press of his work, of meeting strange people and seeing strange places,
he had thought the image of Nevada was blurred; a charming personality dimmed
by distance and the urge of other thoughts, other interests. But when he held
her hand, looked up into her eyes as she stood on the step of the porch, he
had a curious sensation of having been poignantly hungry for her all this
while. He found himself fighting a desire to take her in his arms and kiss her
red mouth that was smiling down at him. He had to remind himself that he
hadn’t the right to do that; that Nevada had never given him the faintest
excuse to believe that he would ever be privileged to kiss her.

He sat in the homemade chair on the porch and, because looking at Nevada
disturbed him unaccountably, he stared down at the river while they talked. He
wondered if Nevada really felt as unconcerned over his coming as she sounded
and looked. She was friendly, frankly pleased to see him,--and he resented the
fact that she could speak so openly of her pleasure. She could have said to
any acquaintance the things she said to him, he told himself savagely; she was
like all her letters, friendly, unconstrained, impersonal. It amazed him now
to remember that he had been delighted with her letters. If at first he had
wished them more diffident, as if she felt the sweet possibilities of their
friendship, he had come to thank the good Lord for one sensible girl in the
world. Nevada had no nonsense, he frequently reminded himself. She didn’t
expect the mushy love-making flavor in their correspondence. He could feel
sure of Nevada.

Now it maddened him to feel so sure of her; so sure of her composed
friendliness that left no little cranny for love to creep in. She liked
him,--in the same way that she liked Peter. He could even believe that she
liked him almost as well as she liked Peter; that he stood second in her
affections before all the world. Covertly he studied her whenever the
conversation made a glance into her eyes quite natural and expected. She met
each glance with smiling unconcern,--the most disheartening manner a lover can
face.

“You’ve grown, Cousin Rawley,” she said. “Yes, I’ve got your home name on my
tongue--from Johnny Buffalo, I suppose. Well, you _have_ grown. I don’t mean
your body alone, though you have filled out and your shoulders look broader
and stronger, somehow, even though you may not weigh a pound more. But you’ve
grown mentally. There’s a strength in your face--an added strength. And your
eyes are so _much_ different. You keep me wondering, in between our talk, what
is in your mind--back of those eyes. That’s a sure sign that a great, strong
soul is looking out. It’s been an awful two years, hasn’t it?”

“It has,” Rawley answered quietly, his mind reverting swiftly to several close
squeaks from the enemy at home.

“Two years ago you’d have said ‘You _bet_!’ just like that. ‘It has’ wouldn’t
have seemed expressive enough. That’s what I’m driving at. Now you can just
say ‘It has’, and something back of your eyes and your voice gives the punch.
Cousin Rawley, you can cut out all exclamatory phrases from now on, if you
like. The punch is there. I’ve seen other men back from service. One or two
had that same reserve power. The others were merely full of talk about how
they won the war. It’s funny.”

Rawley did not think it was funny. She had lifted his heart to his throat with
her flattering analysis and had dropped it as a child drops a toy for some
fresher interest. He was all this and all that,--and she had seen other men
return with the same look. Right there Rawley silently indulged himself in his
strongest exclamatory phrase in his vocabulary.

Nevada had turned her head to call something in Indian, replying to her
grandmother’s shrill voice. She did not see what lay back of Rawley’s eyes at
that moment,--worse luck.

“Well, I wanted to get in and help. Gladys and Grandmother knitted sweaters
and socks, and so did I. I wanted to be a Red Cross nurse--was there a girl in
America who didn’t?--but Uncle Peter wouldn’t let me go. He said I was needed
here, to help hold things together. But I’ll tell you what I did do. I went
into the old diggings and mined. I found a stringer or two they hadn’t
bothered with, and I mined for dear life and sent every last color to the Red
Cross. Uncle Peter was helping, too--I mean giving all he could--but I wanted
to do something my own self. And do you know, Cousin Rawley, Grandmother got
right in with me and shoveled gravel to beat the cars! I didn’t write you
about it--it seemed so little to do. And besides, I didn’t realize then the
importance of living up to you. But with that--that Sphinxlike strength you’ve
acquired, I’ll just inform you that your Injuns were on the job.”

“I knew it, anyway. And you did more good than your personal service in
hospital could have done. It took money to keep the nurses going that were on
the job, remember.”

“Two years ago,” mused Nevada, “you’d have called me on that Sphinx remark and
for calling myself Injun. Yes, you have grown. You can keep to the essential
point much better than before. Well, and how is Johnny Buffalo? I haven’t seen
him for a week.”

“Nor I for over two years. I left a note on his table. Nevada, how long has he
had that wheel chair of Grandfather’s standing across the table from his own?”

Nevada looked at him studyingly until Rawley, for all his vaunted strength,
found his eyes sliding away from the directness of her gaze.

“Cousin Rawley, if you have grown hard, you won’t sympathize with Johnny
Buffalo, or understand. For more than a year, now, he has believed that his
sergeant comes and sits in that chair to keep him company. He really believes
it. You mustn’t laugh at him, will you?”

Rawley was staring down at the always hurrying river. He said nothing.

“Just don’t laugh at Johnny,” Nevada urged. “And don’t argue with him. It’s a
_comfort_ to him to believe that. He doesn’t always keep the chair at the
table. Sometimes it is by the window, or close to the fire when I go there. I
think he moves it just as he would if your grandfather were living there with
him.”

“That’s nonsense!” Rawley spoke sharply.

“It’s a comfort to Johnny Buffalo,” Nevada observed calmly. “I’m glad I saw
you first, if that is your attitude. Johnny Buffalo has been brighter and
happier, ever since he first thought he saw your grandfather walk in at the
door and stand smiling down at him. He insists that his sergeant has his legs
back, and that not a day passes but he comes and sits awhile with him.
He--there’s something he won’t tell me, but he’s very anxious to see you,
especially. I think it is something concerning your grandfather.”

“Oh, well, if it’s any comfort to the old man--” Rawley frowned, but his tone
was yielding.

“Then do, please, act as if you believed your grandfather is there when Johnny
says he is there! You needn’t pretend to see him. I never do. I always say I
can’t see him; and then Johnny Buffalo tells me just how he looks, and what he
says. It pleases him so! He will be sure to have his sergeant meet you, Cousin
Rawley. And you must pretend to believe. He’s just waiting for you to come, so
that something important can take place. He wouldn’t even tell Uncle Peter
what it is.” Nevada leaned dangerously toward Rawley and laid a hand on his,
apparently as unconscious of the possible results as is a child who picks up
an explosive.

“Promise me, Cousin Rawley, that you’ll be careful not to hurt Johnny’s
feelings.” Her hand closed warmly over his.

Rawley’s silence was not the stubbornness she seemed to think it. He was
holding his teeth clamped together, trying to reach that quiet strength of
soul she had naïvely credited him with possessing. He had tried to hold
himself together, to refrain from making a fool of himself, and she had
mistaken the effort for strength of soul, he thought with secret chagrin. Oh,
as to Johnny Buffalo--

“I should feel very badly if I knew that I had hurt any one’s feelings,” he
said. “Least of all, Johnny Buffalo. If he can be happy with an hallucination,
I shall not disturb his happiness. But that means a mental letting go,
according to my way of thinking. When he takes to having delusions, he’s
weakening. I don’t like that. I can’t be with him, you see. I have a few days
to myself, and then I must be on the job again.”

“Oh. I thought you would be here for awhile, anyway.”

Rawley tried to extract some comfort from Nevada’s tone of regret. But her
regret was, after all, too candid to mean anything especial, he feared. He did
not make the mistake of asking her if she really minded his going again so
soon.

“How is the dam coming along?” That, at least, would be a sane subject, he
hoped.

“Oh--it’s coming along. I believe they’re all across the river, to-day.”

She did not seem eager to pursue that subject, either. He began to wonder more
than ever what was in her mind. Something she would not talk about, he knew.
But presently she pulled herself out of her preoccupation.

“Can you imagine that sliding volume of water being halted in all its hurry
and made to stop running to the gulf; thwarted in its whole purpose?” she
asked dreamily. “I’ve watched it all my life. Sometimes it’s savage and boils
along, with driftwood and débris of all kinds--I saw it at Needles, once, in
flood time. It was awful. Then to think how three men have lived beside it and
planned and worked for years and years, to stop all that tremendous movement
and pen it up in the hills and--it seems to me that it’s like life. It goes
hurrying along, too, for years and years, and its power is devastating and
awful, sometimes. And then--after all, it’s so easy to stop it.”

“Yes,” said Rawley, his thoughts forced back again to things he would like to
forget. “It’s easy to stop it. Like that.” He snapped his fingers. “A man
standing so close to me our shoulders rubbed was stopped in the middle of a
sentence. We were talking. I asked him something about the mine. He was
telling me. A cable broke, and the end of it snapped our way and caught him in
the head. Life stopped right there, so far as he was concerned. He wasn’t
given time to finish what he was saying.”

Nevada was staring at him, her lips parted, the easy flow of her thoughts
halted by the horror of the picture he had drawn with a few quiet words. So
few words--spoken so quietly, she thought fleetingly.

“I--didn’t know--right beside you! It might have--Weren’t you hurt?”

Rawley lifted a hand to his cheek, where a fine, white line was drawn.

“The tip of one strand flicked me there,” he said. “Made a nasty gash.”

The pallor in Nevada’s face deepened. She shivered as if a sudden chill had
struck her skin.

“Well,” said Rawley, after a further five minutes of staring at the river.
“I’ll be getting back. Tell Peter I’ll be down again. Or if he can take the
time, have him come up, will you?”

“Why don’t you call him father?” Nevada asked him. “You aren’t ashamed of him,
are you?”

Rawley looked at her, the truth on the tip of his tongue. But he closed his
lips a bit more firmly, smiled down at her and shook his head.

“Peter and I understand each other,” he told her enigmatically and went away.

He quite agreed with Nevada. Even in times of peace, life could almost be
called devastating.




CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

THE TRUTH ABOUT RICHES


“To-morrow,” said Johnny Buffalo, with a transparent air of triumph, “we will
go to the cleft in the rocks, by the path which no man knoweth, and you shall
go down into the deep pit and find the gold.”

“What’s that?” Rawley looked up from crowding tobacco into his pipe after a
most satisfying supper. “You found it, did you?”

“My sergeant led me to the place,” Johnny Buffalo stated gravely. “There was a
mistake. The great and high mountain which holds the gold was not that
greatest mountain which we can see. There were cedar trees scattered over the
face of the mountain when my sergeant found the gold. That was many years ago.
Now there are no cedar trees or trees of any kind. That is why we could not
find the place. One year ago, my sergeant came and led me to the spot.”

“Is the gold there?” Rawley leaned forward, studying the old Indian through
half-shut eyes.

“I did not go down into the pit. My sergeant would not permit me to go. He
says that you will go, and that you will there learn the truth about riches.
He told me that I must not go down and look, for it would not be good that I
should see what will be revealed to you.” Johnny Buffalo spoke as if he were
reciting a lesson. His face was turned toward the empty wheel chair, drawn
before the open window.

Rawley frowned over the lighting of his pipe. The mystical message made little
impression on his mind, but he did worry over the Indian’s implicit belief in
it. His promise to Nevada bound him to silence on the subject of
hallucinations, however, even though he had in mind several things which he
would like to say.

Johnny Buffalo, sitting straight-backed with his hands spread palm down on his
knees, related all the incidents of his life during the past two years. Queo
had been accused of other murders, and after a particularly heinous one at the
Techatticup mine had disappeared altogether. Once Johnny Buffalo had seen him
and had taken a shot at him, but again the gun had kicked,--or perhaps his aim
was not too good. He had missed. Once his cabin had been robbed of food, and
he suspected the outlaw of committing the depredation. Of the tribe of Cramer
he would say little. Not once in the two years had he been in their camp, he
said. Peter and Nevada came often to see him. They were good to him. His
sergeant had come, and he had seen him. His sergeant sometimes spoke to him.
Perhaps Rawley would see him.

Rawley did not think so, but he refrained from voicing his doubt. As tactfully
as possible he avoided the subject and told some of his own adventures, to
which Johnny Buffalo listened with polite attention. It was plain to Rawley
that his mind was given up to another matter, and that he was merely waiting
with his Indian patience until he could guide his adopted son to the secret
cleft on the side of the mountain.

“No man has been before us,” he declared emphatically, when Rawley questioned
him. “Bushes have grown in the cleft until I could not have found it or
suspected that a cleft was there if my sergeant had not shown me the spot. The
cleft is there. I have seen it. The bushes are very old, and there is much
dead wood. There is the great heap of stones, and there has been a dead tree.
But it is gone many years and only the root is left to show that it once stood
joined to the great heap of stones. When the sun comes I will show you.”

He was punctiliously true to his promise, for the sun was not ten minutes
above the peak across the river when Rawley stood beside the “Great heap of
stones ... joined to a dry tree”, or what even he could see had once been a
dry tree. It had been an unmerciful trail, and he could easily believe that it
was a path which the eye of man had not seen. Indeed, it was not a path at
all, but a line of least obstruction through an upheaval of what Rawley’s
trained eyes recognized as iron-stained quartz and porphyry.

The place was almost inaccessible, and from a short distance it resembled a
blow-out of granite so much that no prospector would trouble to investigate.
Besides, Johnny Buffalo explained that this had been a popular habitat of
snakes, and that he had spent a great deal of his time, since the location of
the spot, in hunting rattlesnakes. He proudly added that he had earned many
dollars in extracting the oil and in selling the skins. He feared that he had
not gathered them all, however, and he warned Rawley against setting his foot
carelessly amongst the rocks.

Johnny Buffalo then gathered dry leaves and started a fire in the brush. So
much dead wood underlay the growth that the crevice was presently a furnace.

“If any snakes are there, they will come out,” he observed grimly. “Also,
light will go down, so that you will not stumble in darkness. I know what my
sergeant meant in the message: ‘Take heed, now ... that is exceeding deep.’
You will need light.”

Rawley nodded. He was watching the flames curiously.

“By Jove, Johnny, I believe you are right,” he exclaimed, pointing. “Do you
see that? There is a strong draught from _beneath_. There’s an opening down
there, sure as anything. And I’ll admit to you right now that this is gold
formation blown out here. The iron stain is a good mask for it. I can readily
believe that it hasn’t been prospected.”

“My sergeant does not speak lies,” Johnny Buffalo retorted imperturbably. “I
know that it is so.” Whereupon he gave chase to a rattlesnake that had slipped
out from between two tilted bowlders and went sliding sinuously away. With a
crude trident, long of handle and tough and light, he pinned the snake to the
ground and neatly sliced off its head with a light ax which he carried
suspended from his belt.

“Here’s another,” Rawley told him, and Johnny Buffalo, moving with surprising
agility, caught that one also.

“For a time I gathered the venom in a bottle,” he informed Rawley in his
serious tone. “But now I take only the body. When you go down into the pit
there will be no snakes until you reach the bottom. Then you look out.”

Rawley was sufficiently impressed to borrow the trident, which was barbed and
could kill as easily as it could capture. So, when the fire had died and the
rocks had cooled a little, he went down into the pit.

A blowhole it was, such as is frequently found in a country so torn by
volcanic action. As he descended he read the signs at a glance,--signs which
to a layman would have meant nothing whatever. Beneath all this, said the
rocks to Rawley, there should be gold. His pulse quickened as he worked his
way downward, seeking foothold precariously where he might. The thought that
Grandfather King, of all the millions of men in the world, was the only one
who had ever dared these depths, thrilled him with pride. Not even the Indians
had known of it, he was sure. He wondered how his grandfather had managed the
snakes, and then it occurred to him that Grandfather King might have
discovered this place late in some season after the snakes had been overcome
by their winter lethargy.

He breathed freer when his feet crunched in coarse gravel and he knew that he
had reached the bottom. He had encountered no snakes, which he considered good
luck, especially since he had needed hands and feet and all his great strength
to negotiate the descent, and had been compelled to abandon the trident before
he had gone fifty feet. As nearly as he could estimate, the blowhole was well
over two hundred feet in depth, and there were places where he had no more
than comfortable room for his body. The flashlight hung on a thong around his
neck showed him how terrific had been the explosion that had torn this crevice
open to the surface.

Rawley stood in a cavern probably ten feet high and extending farther than his
light could penetrate in two directions, which his pocket compass showed him
as east and west. So far the code was correct. The width he estimated as being
approximately thirty feet, although the walls drew in or receded sharply, as
the formation turned hard or soft. He faced toward the east and went forward,
pacing three feet at a stride, his flashlight throwing a white brilliance
before him.

Seventy-two strides down the high, tunnel-like cavern brought him to the
“River of pure water.” There he stopped and stood, turning his light here and
there upon the walls, the water, the gravel. His heart, that had been beating
exultantly as his hopes rose higher, slumped and became a leaden weight.

Gold had been there. Of that he had no doubt whatever. But the placer had been
mined,--gutted and abandoned. He apprehended at once the truth; that here was
an underground stream, one of the sunken rivers for which the desert country
is famous--that, or a small branch of a sunken river. There must be some other
point of ingress, one of which Grandfather King had no knowledge. Some one had
come in by the other route and had taken the gold. The work had been done
systematically, by miners who knew what they were about. A glance at the
workings told him that.

Rawley turned his light down the stream. As far as its rays could pierce the
dark of the cavern, the placer workings extended. He went on, following the
windings of the stream and its natural tunnel. Now that he had discovered his
grandfather’s potential riches, the legacy which he had confidently believed
was a fortune, Rawley was determined to see just where the watercourse would
lead him.

He thought that he must have followed it for a mile or more, although it could
have been farther. All the way along, the gravel had been worked and the gold
taken out. A suspicion had been growing in his mind, and quite suddenly it
crystallized into certainty. He walked into a larger cavern, the full extent
of which he could not see from that point. There he stopped and considered.

Near at hand, all around him, black cans were piled. He did not need the
second glance to tell him what it was he had run into. Here was the secret
hoard of black powder which the Cramers had been gathering together for years.
Here was the powder that would, in the space of a breath, tear down two
mountain sides and halt the flow of a great river,--if what they hoped and
dreamed should come to pass.

The Cramers, then, had taken the gold which Grandfather King had discovered.
Here was a part of it, no doubt, transformed into tons of explosive. Rawley’s
grin was sardonic as he surveyed the piled cans. It would be a bitter ending
for their quest that he must show to Johnny Buffalo, he thought.

He walked on slowly and halted suddenly when a light showed ahead. Some one
was coming toward him, and Rawley instinctively snapped off his light and
moved to one side. War habits were still strong upon him, and in any case he
would not trust the Cramers.

Presently he saw that it was Peter, and called to him and went forward. Peter
was astonished, but he was also glad to see Rawley.

“I meant to walk over to your place this evening,” he explained. “We’re so
busy, right now--”

“With the dam?” Rawley sat down on a keg of powder, started to roll a
cigarette and remembered that it might not be wise.

“Yes. We’re loading her as fast as we can. It’s a big job, and the old man is
getting fractious over the delay.” Peter sat down on another keg and took off
his hat, wiping his forehead with his sleeve. “It’s going to be a blistering
day outside. Seems like an ice-box in here. How did you come?”

Then Rawley told him.

Peter listened in complete silence, his arms folded on his knees. When Rawley
had finished, Peter straightened up with a sigh.

“I never dreamed we had cut into your ground,” he said heavily. “I thought, as
you probably did, that the code described an old, underground watercourse some
miles from here. But you must be right, this is it. Old Jess discovered gold
near the river, at a point where this stream back here dives under the cliffs
and empties, most likely, into the river somewhere under the water line. It
was rich; a heap richer than any one ever dreamed, I guess. And the fact that
the stream flowed right into the Colorado may have given him his first idea of
gathering the gold that had washed on into the river. If you come with me,
I’ll show you.”

“I can’t be too long,” said Rawley. “Johnny Buffalo’s up on top, waiting for
me to come back with my pockets full of gold. It’s going to be hard on the old
man, especially since Grandfather’s gold went into the clutches of Old Jess. I
don’t know that I’d better tell him. At the same time,” he mused aloud, “I
can’t tell him that there isn’t any gold; he is so firmly convinced that his
sergeant told the truth. He’d have to know that some one else has beat us to
it.”

Peter turned and looked at him thoughtfully. “I’ll give you some nuggets to
take up to him,” he said. “Old Johnny’s pretty keen, and he holds a bad grudge
against Young Jess and the old man. If I could, you know I’d replace the gold
we got from under that blowhole. But I can’t. It has all been spent,
practically. Gone into the dam, along with the rest.”

Rawley laid his hand on Peter’s shoulder and left it there.

“You wouldn’t do anything of the kind,” he laughed. “That darned dam idea of
yours is catching. I’ve got it, and got it bad. If that gold you beat me to
will tip enough rock into the river to make a good job of the dam, I’m
satisfied. All I ask is that you let me know when you’re ready so I can see
her go. Are you doing as I advised,--preparing to shoot her with electricity?”

Peter nodded. “Old Jess kicked on the cost, but we showed him how it was the
only safe way. She’s all loaded, across the river. We did that during low
water and carried the wiring across up to a high, overhead cable that crosses
the river all ready to be hooked up to the battery. I talked with a mining man
about explosives and found out some things that came in pretty handy, I guess.
I got a hint not to break the ground with dynamite enough so that the power of
the black powder would be killed in the seams opened up. We didn’t use so much
dynamite, after all. We’re depending on the black powder.”

“I still warn you against it,” said Rawley. “But if you can’t be stopped, I do
want to see the fireworks. There’s a pretty engineering problem there, and it
will be worth a good deal to see how it works out.” His thoughts returned
again to the old Indian waiting up on the hill. “I’ll buy some gold from you,
Uncle Peter, if you have it handy. I’ll tell old Johnny it’s all I could find;
I think I can satisfy the old fellow with the thought that his sergeant had it
straight.”

Peter left him for five minutes and returned, carrying a small canvas sack.

“Here’s a handful of specimens I tucked into a niche in the rocks, intending
to give them to Nevada for a necklace or something,” he told Rawley. “But
Nevada can have diamond necklaces when the dam goes in. You take these, boy.
Maybe some of them sort of belong to you, anyway.”

“Lord, _I_ don’t want them,” Rawley protested. “I’ll give them to Johnny
Buffalo, though. It will keep him from worrying about it. More than all that,
it will keep him off the warpath, the old catamount.”




CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

GREATER THAN GOLD


Johnny Buffalo held a handful of nuggets in his hard, brown palms. His eyes
shone whenever he looked toward the old wheel chair beside the window. He
listened to Rawley’s explanation of why there would be no more gold, but the
technical phraseology went completely over his head, and he smiled
abstractedly and held up first one bit of gold and then another to the light.
They were very heavy. They were beautiful. They had lain, hidden away all
these years, just where his sergeant had said that they were hidden.

“‘There is a path which no man knoweth,’” he muttered, when Rawley had
finished and was waiting to see what effect his harangue about erosions and
changed currents had taken on the Indian mind. “It is so. My sergeant said it,
and it was the truth. My sergeant never lied. Always the words he spoke were
true. I know it without proof. Now you have the proof, and you know it also.”

“There won’t be any more, you understand,” Rawley repeated with finality. “My
work is to examine these matters and report the truth about them. After
examining what lies at the bottom of the pit, I am reporting to you that there
will be no more gold--”

Johnny Buffalo stopped him with a hand lifted, palm out. “What was revealed to
you in the pit is not good for me to know,” he stated firmly. “My sergeant has
said that you should know the truth about riches. He said that it would not be
good that I should know the truth as you would know it.”

“That’s true, too,” Rawley admitted, taken aback.

“The gold was there when my sergeant said that it was there. That is good. My
sergeant did not say that there would always be gold where gold has been. I
think that is the truth about riches which you have learned.”

“You’re right, Johnny.” Rawley grinned at him ruefully. “If we’ve had any
dream of being millionaires, we may as well forget it. Grandfather gave us the
straight dope, and you found the cleft in the rocks. It isn’t Grandfather’s
fault that the millions have moved on. So that’s all of that, and the next
thing is something else.”

“The next thing is what is given us to do,” said Johnny Buffalo solemnly. “We
will do our duty, whatever that may be. Now I have no more searching for my
sergeant’s gold. I shall live here until it is time to go. I do not think it
will be long.”

Rawley looked at him anxiously, but he could not bring himself to speak what
was in his mind. Johnny Buffalo would not understand that to the young death
is a dreadful thing, to be shunned and never thought of voluntarily,--an ogre
that may snatch one away from the joys of living. After all, he thought,
Johnny Buffalo had outlived his love of life. No one needed him. He had only
to wait. Rawley wished that he could be with him longer and oftener, but that
was not possible unless he were willing to sacrifice the work he loved. Even
if he could bring himself to that, Johnny Buffalo would not permit it. It
would break his heart to feel that he had hindered his sergeant’s grandson.

“Your work,” said Johnny Buffalo, almost as if he had been reading Rawley’s
thoughts, “is better than the gold. A man is great within himself, or he is
nothing. The full pocket makes the empty head. It is greater fortune that you
have honor and youth and work to perform. So my sergeant would tell you.”

“You’re right, Johnny,” Rawley assented again. “If we’d found a ton of gold I
think I’d have gone on with my work just the same. A man my age can’t stop
working for the sake of seeing how fast he can spend money. I couldn’t,
anyway.”

“Then you do not need the gold. You can earn what you need and have the
pleasure twice: in the getting and in the spending. So you have not lost.”

“We’re a great pair of philosophers,” Rawley laughed, “or else we are eating
sour grapes. Blamed if I know, sometimes, just where the difference lies. Or
perhaps there isn’t any, and crying sour grapes is true philosophy, after
all.”

Peter and Nevada, coming up the path, diverted the talk to lighter channels.
Nevada, spying the gold, exclaimed over the odd pieces and took them in her
cupped palm to admire each specimen by itself.

“They are yours, save this one which I shall keep,” said Johnny Buffalo
unexpectedly. “Rawley will not take them. I do not need gold. I have three
friends and the spirit of my sergeant, who waits for me. I am rich. They are
yours. Put them on a chain and hang them around your neck while yet it is
white and round.”

Nevada looked at him a full fifteen seconds before she moved. Then she rose
and kissed Johnny Buffalo on the withered cheek nearest her.

“To know a man like you is a privilege,” she said simply. “I shall keep the
nuggets to remind me that not all men worship gold.”

“You will wear them in a necklace. My sergeant wishes you to have them. They
are not so beautiful as your white throat.”

Nevada blushed vividly and shook the nuggets in her two hands. “It’s a good
thing Grandmother can’t hear you,” she laughed. “An old bachelor like you!”

“An old bachelor can say what the young man dares only to think,” Johnny
Buffalo stated calmly.

Rawley was trying distractedly to read a letter which Nevada had brought down
from the post-office, and to pretend that he did not hear what was going on.
But it is reasonable to assume that there was nothing in the letter to make
him blush at the moment when Johnny Buffalo said his little say. Nevada stole
a glance at him from under her lashes and smiled.

“What is it, Cousin Rawley?” she asked wickedly. “You seem disturbed.”

“I’m called back on the job.” Rawley tried to meet her eyes unconcernedly. “I
won’t even have the week I promised myself. This is pretty urgent, and so I
think I’ll take the trail again in the morning.”

Even Nevada betrayed some mental disturbance over that information, especially
when Rawley could not hazard any opinion concerning his next visit.

“I won’t even have time to look over your work at the dam,” he told Peter. “I
intended going down to-morrow. I wanted to have a talk with you about that.
I’ve picked up a little information, here and there, and I’m afraid there will
be complications. But I’ve been holding off until I was sure of my ground. I
know, of course, that my personal opinion won’t have much weight.”

Peter shook his head. “You can work and pry and lift till your eyes pop out of
your head, starting a bowlder down a mountain,” he said grimly, “and you can
give it the last heave and over she goes. Any time, up to that last heave, you
can quit and she stays right there where she was planted. But once she starts,
all hell can’t stop her. I’m afraid we’ve given the last heave, son.”

“_Look out below!_” Nevada cried mockingly and looked at Rawley. “I could tell
a cousin in three words how he can make himself as popular as a rattlesnake
with the Cramers,--and the last of the Macalisters.”

“And those three words?” Rawley looked her squarely in the eyes.

“Fight the dam.” Nevada’s eyes were as steady as his own.

“Thunder!” Rawley sat back and reached for his tobacco sack. “I’ve no notion
of fighting the dam. It’s the biggest proposition I ever saw three lone
men--and a girl; excuse me, Nevada!--tackle in my life. Four of you, thinking
to stop, just like that,”--he made a slicing, downward gesture, “--the second
largest river in the United States! You’ll be damming the Gulf Stream next, I
suppose. Divert it so as to warm up Maine and make it a winter-bathing
resort!”

“Do you dare us to try?” Nevada poured nuggets from one palm to the other.
“That might be a good investment, when we’ve made our clean-up in the river
bed.” She smiled dreamily at her handful of gold. “That’s a wonderful idea. We
need some wonderful idea to work on, after the dam is in and the gold is out.
You can’t,” she looked up wistfully at Rawley, “you can’t live with a
tremendous idea all your life and suddenly drop back to three meals a day and
which dress shall you wear. One would go mad. It--it’s like taking the
mainspring out of life.”

Johnny Buffalo nodded his head in significant approval. “A man can only wait,
then, until it is time to go,” he said with quiet decision.

“Very well. I’ll speak to the Peace Conference about the Gulf Stream,” Rawley
assured her gravely. “In case I am unable to reserve it for you--would the
Gulf of Mexico do, or the Mississippi River, perhaps?”

“We’re accustomed to cracking our whip over fresh water,” Nevada retorted. “I
should prefer to have the Mississippi, please.”

Johnny Buffalo glanced toward the wheel chair, gazed at it intently and nodded
his head.

“You will succeed and fail in the succeeding,” he intoned solemnly. “In the
failure you will rise to greater things. It is so. My sergeant never speaks
what is not true.”

Eyes moved guardedly to meet other eyes that understood, conveying a warning
that the old man must be humored. Johnny Buffalo stood up, his face turned
toward the wheel chair. He seemed to be listening. His eyes brightened. The
wrinkles in his bronzed old face deepened and radiated joy.

“It is good! I need not wait--I go now!” He took an eager step and wavered
there.

Peter and Rawley, rising together, caught the old man in their arms as he went
down, falling slowly like a straight, old tree whose roots have snapped with
age.




CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

THE EAGLE LOOKS UPON A GREAT RIVER


Rawley drove down El Dorado Canyon, now silent in mid-afternoon, with not a
sound of stamp mill or compressor or the mingled voices of men at work.
Techatticup stood forlorn, deserted save by one old man who bore himself
proudly because he was the guardian there. The war, the labor question, the
slump in metals, had done their work. It seemed to Rawley as if the nation
were taking a long breath, making ready to go forward again more resistlessly
than before. He missed Johnny Buffalo terribly; but if he could, he would not
have called him back. Johnny would have had a dreary time of it, alone all
these long months when Rawley’s work had held close to the affairs of the
government.

The eye of the Eagle had not been closed. His keen glance had gone to this and
to that, his piercing gaze had fixed itself upon the desert land and the river
that went hurrying down through flaming gorge and painted canyon, a law unto
itself, an untaught, untamed giant of the wild; a scenic wonder set deep in
savage walls of rock, where people came and looked down upon it, drew back
shivering, ventured to look again in silent awe; a terrible, devastating thing
from which men fled in terror when the giant river rose, leaped from its bed
and went raging across the land.

Men called for power, for protection, for water to till barren acres that
might be made fertile. Men shouted for the things which the Colorado held
arrogantly within its grasp, to hoard with miserly greed or to let loose in a
ferocious fury. The Colorado had power, it had water, it had a cruel habit of
devouring lands and homes and whooping onward toward the gulf, heedless of the
destruction in its wake.

And the Eagle had lifted his head and turned his eyes upon the great river.
Here, within the borders of his domain, dwelt a powerful, savage thing that
must be tamed and taught to obey the will of men. The Eagle considered this
headlong defiance of all civilized restraint. The Eagle saw how men looked
upon the river, drew back in awe and ventured to look again; men, who should
be the masters of the river. The Eagle lifted and spread his wings. And the
tip of a wing reached over the desert land and laid its shadow across the
Colorado.

A great orator had painted it so, and Rawley was thinking of that picture of
the Eagle as he drove down the canyon to the very brink of the river and
climbed out of his car. Still desolate, more forsaken than ever was the place
where El Dorado had stood alive, alert, self-sufficient. The camp was gone,
almost forgotten. The river flowed past, disdainful of the puny efforts of men
who died and forgot their dreams and their endeavors, while it rushed on
through the ages, and played with the lives of men and mocked at their fear of
it.

But three men and a girl had dared to dream of holding the might of it in
leash. It was to see these dreamers, to warn and to show them the shadow of
the Eagle’s wing, that he had come in haste to the bank of the Colorado. For
months he had heard nothing. Nevada had not written, or if she had the letter
had not reached him. There was danger in delay, in their continued silence.

Rawley slung a canteen over his shoulder and started up the river, taking the
well-known trail. This was the quickest way to reach the Cramers, and now that
he was in their neighborhood once more a great impatience was upon him, a
nervous dread that he might be an hour, a minute too late for what he had come
to do.

He came upon Nevada suddenly. She was standing on the site of the old camp
where he had stayed with Johnny Buffalo. Her back was toward him, and she was
holding something in her two hands; something he had seen her extract from the
thorny branches of a stunted mesquite bush. When his footsteps sounded close,
she turned and looked at him dumbly, her eyes wide and dark. The thing she
held in her hands was his pipe,--one that he had lost on that first trip into
the country.

Before his better judgment or his doubts could stop him, Rawley drew her into
his arms and held her close while he kissed her. It was so good to see her
again, to feel her nearness. But after one rapturous minute, she put away his
arms and faced him calmly, though her breath was not quite even and her eyes
would not meet his with the old frankness.

“Your one eighth of Indian blood should have given you more reserve, Cousin
Rawley,” she reproved him mockingly. “The Spanish of us must be watched. Well,
I needn’t ask about your health; you haven’t been pining during your absence,
that one could notice.”

Rawley barely escaped forswearing both his Indian and his Spanish blood, but
remembered his promise just in time. He did not believe that Nevada regretted
his impulsiveness,--for you simply can’t fool a man under thirty when he
kisses a girl. Nevada’s lips, he joyously remembered, had not been
unresponsive.

“Here’s your pipe,” she said lamely, when he only stood and looked at her. “I
was just wondering whether it’s worth saving, or whether I’d better heave it
into the river and see how far it would float.”

Rawley did not believe that she intended to heave it anywhere, but he passed
the point.

“If cousins fell in love, they--would you consider the relationship any bar--”

Nevada went white around the mouth.

“I certainly should! You ought to be ashamed to ask a question like that. No
man with any decency could think of such a thing.”

“I’m decent,” Rawley contended, “and I thought of it.” But he did not pursue
the subject further. Nevada had turned and was walking on toward the camp of
Cramer, and Rawley could do nothing but follow. The path was too narrow to
permit him to walk beside her, and a man feels a fool making love to a woman’s
back.

“Have you done anything further about the dam?” he asked, after a silence.

“I believe the work is going ahead,” Nevada replied, keeping straight on.

“You must have received my letter about it; or didn’t you?”

“Yes, I received a letter about something of the sort.”

“You didn’t answer it, did you? I never received any reply.”

“I did not think,” said Nevada, “that the letter required any answer. You
wrote and told us to stop all work on the dam, and give up the idea, because
some one else wanted to build a dam. Or was considering the building of a dam.
I read that letter to Grandfather and Uncle Jess and Uncle Peter, as you
requested. They swore rather fluently and went to work the next morning as
usual.” Then, as if it had just occurred to her, “Did you come to see about
that, Cousin Rawley?”

“Oh, I wish you’d omit the ‘cousin’,” Rawley blurted irrelevantly. “I don’t
like having it rubbed in.”

Nevada said nothing for a time. Then she laughed, a hard little laugh that
sounded strange, coming from her.

“Certainly, if you wish. I’m very sorry I seem to have ‘rubbed it in’, as you
put it. And I quite understand how you feel. Out among men--and women--as you
have been, all your life, the--er--mixed relationship would prove rather a
handicap. Poor old Grandfather and Grandmother should have thought of their
children’s children, before they fell in love. And Uncle Peter should either
have brought you here and raised you with the rest of the tribe, or never told
you the truth. I’m not blaming him; I’m merely sorry for the mistake. I know
what it means. I’ve been out in the world, too.”

Rawley stared at the proud lift of her head and wondered just how much of that
she meant. She must be quite aware of his reason for disliking to be called
her cousin, but he would not argue with her. Except about the handicap.

“You’re mistaken, if you think the mixed blood is an objectionable feature,”
he said firmly. “Indian and Spanish have the same essential characteristics of
race that the straight white blood owns. Besides, there are mighty few
Americans who couldn’t trace back to something of the sort. Character, culture
and environment sweep a few drops of red blood into the background, Nevada.
You wouldn’t feel bitter over it, if you didn’t live right here and see the
Indian predominate in Young Jess and Gladys--and your grandmother.”

“_Your_ grandmother, as well as mine,” she flashed over her shoulder with a
very human spitefulness. “Don’t deny it--to me.”

Rawley did not deny anything at all; wherefore, conversation languished
between the two. Since first he had known her, Nevada had frequently withdrawn
into an unapproachable aloofness discouraging to any lasting intimacy, but she
had never before betrayed resentment against her blood.

He had hoped that she would be glad to see him and would let him see that she
was glad. He had hoped to win her complete confidence in his devotion to their
interests and welfare. He needed to have both Nevada and Peter on his side, if
he were going to be successful in his mission to the Cramers. But he was
extremely doubtful now of ever winning Nevada’s confidence. It began to look
as though he may as well count her an opponent and be done with doubt.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

ANITA


Life seemed to have moved sluggishly in the basin, save in the increase of the
tribe. Six young Cramers now walked upright, though the smallest walked
insecurely and frequently fell down and lay squalling with its eyes shut and
its nose wrinkled until one of the older children picked it up and dusted it
off, remonstrating the while in Pahute. The seventh was not yet old enough to
ride the well-upholstered hip of Gladys, but wailed in a cradle which some one
must be incessantly rocking.

Gladys was more slatternly than ever she had been, and her vacuous grin had
lost a tooth. Anita had aged terribly, Rawley thought. She moved slowly, with
a long stick for a staff, and her eyes held a dumb misery he could not face.
Nevada informed him that Grandmother had not been very well, lately, although
there was nothing wrong, particularly.

“She doesn’t sleep at all, it seems to me,” Nevada detailed. “Often she’s up
and prowling along the river bank in the middle of the night, and I have to go
and lead her back. I think she’s getting childish. She will sit and watch me
by the hour, when I’m working, but she doesn’t seem to want me to talk to her.
She just sits and looks, the way she’s been looking at you.”

Nevada went away then to some work which she said was important, and Rawley
wandered down to the river bank. In a few minutes he heard a sound behind him
and turned, hoping that Nevada had yielded to his unspoken desire and was
coming to join him.

But it was Anita, walking slowly down the uneven pathway, planting her crude
staff ahead of her in the trail and pulling herself to it with a weary,
laborious movement. Her gray bangs hung straight down to her eyelids. Her
wrinkled old face was impassive, her eyes dumb. Rawley bit his lip suddenly,
thinking of his Grandfather King sitting, “a hunk of meat in the wheel chair.”
Life, it seemed to him, had dealt very harshly with these two. He was no
longer swayed by the stern prejudice of Johnny Buffalo. He did not believe
that Anita, in her lovely youth, had been merely a whimsy of love. His
grandfather had loved her, had meant to return to her. He did not believe that
King, of the Mounted, would have loved one who loved many. The King pride
would not have permitted that.

Anita came up to him and leaned hard upon her stick, her eyes turned dully
upon the river. Never before had she sought him out; rather had she avoided
him, staring at him with a look he interpreted as resentment. She looked so
old, so infinitely tired with life, and her eyes went to the river as if it
alone could know the things she had buried in her heart, long ago when she was
a slim young thing, all fire and life.

With a sudden impulse of tenderness he put his arm around her, leading her to
the flat rock and seating her there as gallantly as if she were Nevada, whom
he loved. It was what his grandfather would have done. Rawley felt suddenly
convicted of a fault, almost of a sin; the sin of omission. Here was the love
of his grandfather’s youth, the mother of his grandfather’s first-born. And
because she was old and fat, because the primitive blood had triumphed and she
had yielded to environment and slipped back into Indian ways, he had
snobbishly held himself aloof. He had ignored her claim upon his kindness. Had
her beauty remained with her, he told himself harshly, his attitude had been
altogether different. Now he wanted to make up to her, somehow, for his
selfish oversight. He sat down beside her and patted her hand,--for the Anita
who had been beautiful, the Anita whom King, of the Mounted, had loved.

“You love--my girl--Nevada?” The old squaw spoke abruptly, though her voice
held to a dead level of impassivity.

“How did you know?” Rawley took away his hand.

“I know. I have seen love--in eyes--blue. Eyes like your eyes.”

“Nevada doesn’t care anything about me, Anita.”

At the word, the old squaw turned her head and stared at him fixedly. “You
call that name. Where you know that name? Jess, he call me Annie.”

Rawley flushed, but there was no help for it now--or, yes, there was Johnny--

“Johnny Buffalo called you Anita,” he parried.

Anita shook her head slowly. “Jawge--your gran’fadder--he call me Anita too,”
she said wistfully. “You ver’ much--like Jawge. I firs’ think--you are ghos’
of Jawge, when you come.”

“Grandfather was crazy about you,” slipped off Rawley’s tongue. “He spoke of
you in his diary--a book where he wrote down things he did--things he
thought.”

Anita stared down at the river.

“You tell me,” she commanded tersely. “All those things--Jawge
think--about--Anita.”

Rawley’s hand went out and closed again over her wrinkled, work-hardened
knuckles.

“The first was when he came up to El Dorado on the _Esmeralda_ in ’66. He was
leaning over the rail, watching the miners crowd down to the landing. He
wrote, ‘I saw a young girl--I think she is Spanish. She has the velvet eyes
and the rose blooming in her cheeks. She’s beautiful. Not more than sixteen
and graceful as a fairy.’ What more he wrote of you I don’t know. He cut the
pages from the book so no one could read it.”

Anita raised a knotted, brown hand and smoothed her bangs, tucking them neatly
under her red kerchief.

“I was little,” she said complacently. “Ver’ beautiful. Every-body
was--crazy--about--me.” She halted, choosing the best English words she knew.
“I was--good girl. I love--nobody. I jus’ laugh all time--when them so’jers
make the love. Then I see--Jawge--my Sah-geant King. He is king to me.
Tall--big--strong--all time laughing--making love with blue eyes--like
you--all time make love--with eyes--to Nevada. I know them eyes--I have
lived--to look--in them eyes.”

“I don’t do anything of the kind,” Rawley protested, confusion crimsoning his
face. “I’ve always tried--”

“Eyes like them eyes--no tell lies. Woman eyes see--things they tell.
Jawge--he write more?”

“Most of it was cut from the book. He called you ‘_el gusto de mi corazon_,’
and his ‘_dulce corazon_.’ Do you know--?”

Beneath his palm Anita’s hand was trembling. She pulled it free and lifted it
to her face, her withered fingers wiping the tears that were slipping down her
wrinkled cheeks. Rawley could have bitten his tongue in two. Awkwardly he
patted her on one huge, rounded shoulder.

Like a lonesome dog, the old woman whimpered behind her brown palm, from
beneath which a tear sometimes escaped and splashed upon her calico wrapper.
Rawley sat silent, abashed before this forlorn grief over a romance fifty
years dead.

“Now I love Nevada, Peter.” She mastered her tears and became again impassive.
“You leave me--Nevada? Lil time--I want Nevada. I die--then you can love--many
years. You do that?”

“Of course. I promised Peter, a long time ago. But it doesn’t matter, anyway.
Nevada doesn’t care a rap about me.”

The old woman looked at him stolidly.

“You not tell Nevada--you not Peter’s boy,” she said. “Nevada think that. You
not tell Nevada--that’s a lie. You tell Nevada, I kill myself.”

“I’ve no intention of telling Nevada,” Rawley said, chilled by her manner. “It
doesn’t matter, anyway.”

“You not come--for Nevada? You not think, marry Nevada--take Nevada ’way off,
I no see any more?” Anita peered into his face.

“No. I came to see Peter. About the dam.”

Anita took some time over this statement. Then she rose stiffly and hobbled
away, leaving Rawley to stare morosely into the river.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

THE EAGLE AND THE VULTURE


“You may as well listen to me,” said Rawley in the incisive tone which big
responsibilities had taught him. “I am your friend. My only object in coming
here is to be of service to you. If you do not listen to what I have to say,
you will have to listen to the Federal Reclamation Service, acting under the
Secretary of the Interior. That may be more convincing to you--but believe me,
it will be less pleasant!”

“You were keen for the dam, last time you were here,” Peter reminded him
drily. “You called it a big idea. You’ve had a change of heart, son.”

“I have. I have come to tell you that there are other ideas bigger than yours,
and a power behind them that will make yours look like building a toy dam in
the sand, like kids. You must have read of it in the papers. There’s been all
kinds of publicity given to the project.”

“You’re right. There’s been a heap of talk,” Peter retorted. “The papers have
done the talking, and we’ve been sawing wood and keeping our mouths shut.
While they’re still talking and arguing and speechifying, we’ll put ’er in.
There’s nothing the matter with that, is there? Take the wind out of their
sails, maybe, especially the fellows that have their speeches all written out,
ready for the next banquet. But,--_the dam will be in_! They’ll have some
work, trying to get around that point.

“You ask if we’ve read the papers. I have. They’ve been talking about spending
a hundred million dollars. We’ve spent one. They’ve been fiddling along the
river, looking to see if it’s feasible. We’ve kept right on digging. They
thought we were _mining_--the only party that discovered our diggings. They
were very patronizing, very polite, and they talked about the wonderful things
a dam would do for us. Is that what you came to tell us, son?”

Rawley leaned back against the wall and laid one foot across the other knee,
tapping his boot with his finger tips. He was facing them all. He must
convince them, somehow, and he must batter down the dream of a lifetime to do
it.

“No, you’ve read most of the talk,” he told Peter. “I admit the thing has
almost been talked to death. It begins to look as though the general public is
tired of reading about damming the Colorado. If that were all there is to it,
Peter, I’d never say a word. But there are some facts we can’t get around with
talk, or defiance. I came here to show them to you--just plain, hard
facts--and let you see for yourself what they mean.

“In the first place--and this is probably the hardest fact you have to
face--the Colorado is an international stream. It flows through a part of
Mexico. The Constitution of the United States has decreed that such rivers
must at all times and in every particular be under the control of the Federal
Government. There are seven States bordering this river, yet not one of them
dare build a dam without the consent and supervision of the government. Get
that firmly planted in your minds, folks.”

Young Jess turned his head an inch and slanted a look at Old Jess. Old Jess
crossed his legs, folded his arms and trotted one rusty boot, waggling his
beard while he chewed tobacco complacently. No one could fail to read his
mind, just then. He was thinking that what seven States were afraid to do, he,
Jess Cramer, had dared. The joke was on the seven States, according to Old
Jess’s viewpoint.

“Arizona,” Rawley went on, after a minute of contemplating the complete
satisfaction of Old Jess, “Arizona wants water for irrigation. One hundred and
fifty thousand acres of desert land can be made fertile with the water of the
Colorado, properly diverted into a system of canals.”

“They kin have the water,” the Vulture conceded benificently. “We don’t want
it. Glad to git rid of it. You kin tell ’em I said so.”

Young Jess laughed hoarsely.

“Sure. Glad to git it off’n our hands!”

“The State of Nevada wants power for her mines. The copper interests are after
a dam up the river here, so that they can resume the output of copper. They
want a smelter, operated by power from the Colorado. Two million brake
horse-power of electric energy is slipping past your door, worse than wasted.

“California wants more power for her industries--”

“She’s welcome,” Old Jess stated smugly. “We ain’t hoggin’ no electric energy
’t I know of.”

“You are, if you interfere with the building of a dam of sufficient size and
strength to conserve that power.”

Young Jess leaned forward, grinning impudently into Rawley’s face.

“Hell! There’s thousands uh miles up river that we ain’t doin’ a thing to.
They kin build dams from here to Denver, fer all we care! That’s all
poppycock, our interferin’. Everybody with ten cents in his pocket is talkin’
about buildin’ a dam in the Colorado. Why the hell don’t they go ahead and
_do_ it? We ain’t stoppin’ nobody!”

“You may be, without knowing it,” Rawley explained patiently, determined to
educate them beyond their single-track idea, if possible. “I see how it looks
to you, of course. But I’ll explain how it looks to the greatest engineers in
the country, Jess. You remember I was rather keen for it, myself. It was out
of my line, and I didn’t know.

“Now the fact is, you are attempting, with a certain amount of rock blown into
the river from the sides, to dam a river second only to the Mississippi.

“I know, the Missouri is wider, but I am speaking now of the volume of water
that passes through this canyon right here. It is a swift river, and it is a
deep river. You don’t realize, any of you, just how deep and how swift it is,
though you have lived beside it all your lives.

“Peter has spoken of the amount of money they are talking of spending to build
a dam at Boulder Canyon, up here. The canyon there is as narrow as this;
perhaps narrower. And to hold back the tremendous volume of water that flows
past your door, engineers have said that they must go down one hundred and
fifty feet, to bed rock, and start there to build their dam. They say that the
dam will--must--to hold back the terrific pressure of water, rise something
like six hundred feet above low-water mark. It will keep several thousand men
working for eight or ten years to complete the dam, its spillways and main
canals. It will cost around one hundred million dollars, and it will bring
both protection and prosperity to thousands and thousands of people. That,” he
declared, leaning forward, “is what it means to dam the Colorado.”

“It don’t mean that to us,” Old Jess stated, turning his quid to the other
cheek. “We aim to show ’em something about buildin’ dams.” He grinned and
showed yellow snags of teeth.

“Yeah. Wait till they see how _we_ aim to do it,” snickered Young Jess. “We’ll
be rakin’ in the gold whilst they’re still standin’ around with their mouths
open.”

Peter had fallen into a taciturn, grim mood, staring somber-eyed at the river.
Beside him, Nevada leaned chin upon her cupped palm and stared also. Several
thousand men, working for eight years! That was as long as the years back to
her first sight of the convent where Peter took her to be educated. Thousands
of men working all that time--thousands! Was it, then, so deceptively vast,
that river? Would the cliffs they had undermined fall in and be swept
disdainfully away? Did it really belong to the government, that river, so that
no man living all his life on its bank might say what should be done with it?
Had Uncle Peter, and Young Jess and her grandfather been children, playing all
these years beside a stream they must not touch or tamper with?

“It sounds as big as the stars,” she observed vaguely. “As if we had been
waving a handkerchief at Mars, down here by the river, and then some one comes
along and pushes us back and says, ‘Here, here, you must stand back. You are
obstructing the view. The President wants to wave his handkerchief. You annoy
him.’ Do you think,” she flashed at Rawley, “it is going to make any
difference to the river--who dams it first?”

“You don’t get the point,” Rawley protested. “I am not responsible because the
undertaking is so stupendous that it is beyond any private enterprise. You
_can’t_ shoot a lot of rock into the river and call that a dam. And if you
could, you must not. Don’t you see? The welfare of too many thousands of
people are involved. It’s a job for the government. You can’t take it for
granted that, just because you have lived beside it all your lives, and
because it doesn’t seem to belong to anybody, any more than the clouds belong,
that you can claim it, or even claim the right to do as you please with it.
There’s a right that goes away beyond the individual--”

“The gold down there is ours,” Old Jess cried fiercely. “We own placer claims
on both sides of the river, and the lines run across. We’ve got a right to
placer the gold in the river bed. It’s _ours_. We got a right to git it any
way we kin! The gov’ment can’t stop us, neither.”

“Oh, yes, it can!” Rawley rashly contradicted. “When you come down to fine
points, the government owns this river. It owns the river bed and whatever
gold is there. By ‘right of eminent domain’, if you ever heard of that.”

“Right of eminent hell!” Young Jess got up and stood over Rawley
threateningly. “Tell _me_ a bunch uh swell-heads back in Wash’n’ton, that
never _seen_ this river, can set and tell us what we can do an’ what we can’t
do? We own claims both sides the river, and we got a right to what’s _in_ the
river. You can’t come here and tell us, this late day, ’t we got to quit, and
lose our time an’ money, because the gov’ment or somebody wants to build a
dam. Hell, _we_ ain’t stoppin’ nobody! They better nobody try an’ stop us,
neither!”




CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

“TAKE THIS FIGHTING SQUAW AWAY!”


Never before had Rawley seen Young Jess in a rage. A surly, ignorant fellow he
knew him to be, and not too intelligent. A dangerous fellow, Rawley believed
him; quite capable of killing any man who thwarted him or roused his fury. But
Rawley did not move or attempt to placate him. He had learned that some
natures must blow up a great storm before they can yield. He hoped that this
was the case with Young Jess.

The old vulture craned his neck forward, his eyes piercingly malevolent.

“Think I’ve waited fifty year fer that gold, t’ be robbed of it now? They
ain’t no gov’ment on earth can step in an’ take what’s mine! I’ll blow ’em to
hell first! I’ll--”

As once before, when he thought his gold was threatened, Old Jess ran the full
gamut of anathema. Nevada fled from the sound of his cracked voice shrieking
maniacal threats and maledictions. He shook his fist under Rawley’s nose and
stamped his feet and raved. Young Jess was over-ridden, silenced by the old
man’s insane outburst.

As once before, Peter said absolutely nothing until Old Jess had reached the
zenith of his rage. Then he rose deliberately and without excitement, took the
old man by the collar and headed him toward the door.

“Go and cool off,” he advised dispassionately. “You old vulture, you can’t
scream any louder than the Eagle. You, too, Jess,” he added, turning harshly
upon his half-brother. “You’re a pretty good man when it comes to swinging a
single-jack, but you’re a damn poor hand at thinking! This thing is away
beyond your depth. You can’t holler the government down. Get out!”

Young Jess blustered and threatened still, flailing his fists and mouthing
oaths.

“That’s about all from you,” grated Rawley, stung to action by some vile
threat against the government.

“Is, hey?” Young Jess advanced upon him.

Then Rawley went for him, the blue eyes of the Kings gone black with fury. The
fight, if it could be called that, was short and undramatic. No tables were
overturned, no glass was shattered. Young Jess aimed a sledge blow at Rawley,
got one on the jaw that spun him so that he faced the other way, and Rawley
forthwith kicked him off the porch. Young Jess rooted gravel, looked over his
shoulder and saw Rawley coming at him again, and started off on all fours.
When he regained his feet he went away, blathering blasphemy. He was going for
his gun,--so he said.

Peter stood looking after Young Jess, his brows pulled together. A slim figure
slipped past him and went straight to Rawley, who was pulling at his tie,
which had gone crooked. She was pale, breathless with the fear that looked out
of her big eyes.

“Oh, you must go--_now_,” she breathed, clasping her two hands around his arm.
“You think he’s just like any other bully, all bluster. He’ll kill you, just
as sure as you stand here. Grandfather, too. Uncle Jess will shoot you in the
back--oh, _anyway_! He’s the worst of the Indian blood; once you rouse him,
there’s _nothing_ he’ll stop at! Get him away, Uncle Peter! It isn’t brave, to
stay and be killed. It’s the worst kind of cowardice; the kind that is afraid
to show itself. Uncle Peter!”

“We’re going, Nevada. I know Young Jess. A rattlesnake’s a prince alongside
him when he’s mad. Son, you should have left him to me. I can handle him
pretty well, no matter how mad he gets. Come along; he’ll not be above potting
you from ambush, Injun style.”

He left the porch at the farther end, pulling Rawley after him; and much as
Rawley hated the thought of retreat, he was forced to believe that Nevada and
Peter, neither of them timid souls, must know what they were talking about.

Nevada disappeared, with no word of farewell to Rawley. Young Jess could be
plainly heard bawling at Gladys because his “shells” had been misplaced.

Peter chuckled.

“One of the kids shot himself through the hat, a month or so ago,” he
explained his amusement. “Since then the guns are kept unloaded. Jess is
hunting cartridges; God bless Gladys for a poor housekeeper!”

He still held a firm grip on Rawley’s arm, leading him down the path to the
river. But suddenly, keeping an ear cocked toward the sounds behind him, he
swung away from the trail toward the bluffs.

“He’s found them, from the way things have quieted down, back there. He’ll be
hot on your trail, now--unless Nevada can stop him, which I doubt. He’s Injun
enough to hold women in contempt when it comes to a show-down. Here.”

He pulled Rawley down between two great, upstanding bowlders standing black
against the stars. Rawley felt a movement of Peter’s arm, and knew that Peter
had pulled a gun from somewhere and was aiming it across a ridge of rock.
Rawley himself could hear nothing but the crying of the wakened baby in the
shack, the yelp of a kicked dog.

For a long time, it seemed to Rawley, they waited. He could not hear a sound.
But Peter still held his gun leveled across the rock before them, and Rawley
could feel how Peter’s muscles were tensed for a struggle.

Two greenish lights showed faintly as a star-beam struck the eyeballs of a
dog. A shuffling sound approaching through the weedy gravel, a sniffling at
Peter’s hand. Rawley felt a crimple down his spine, though he did not think
that he was afraid.

A pebble plunked into something close beside him, and the dog shied off with a
faint, staccato yelp. Young Jess, then, was close. A muttered curse reached
the ears of the two between the bowlders. Immediately afterward, Nevada’s
whisper came distinctly.

“I think he’s hidden here, somewhere in the rocks. His car is down in the
canyon, but he wouldn’t go that way--he’d expect you to follow. Watch the dog.
He hasn’t any gun--I know. Can you creep back toward the hill--”

“Sh-sh. You call him. Quiet, as if you was scared. Make out you’re sweet on
him--”

“I can’t. He knows--I hate him. We quarreled to-day. I hate his snobbish
ways--I told him so.”

“Call his name if you run onto him. Then duck. I’ll--”

“Sh-sh--he may be near!”

The two were standing close together, just beyond the bowlder that reared its
bulk beyond Peter. Rawley bit his lip, straining his ears to hear more.

“You call him. He won’t s’spect--” Young Jess urged in a whisper.

“He’d be a fool if he didn’t. I tell you he knows--”

“He’s stuck on yuh. That makes a fool--”

“Sh-sh. He’s not--”

Inch by inch, Rawley was drawing himself backward, until now he was free of
the bowlder and Peter. From the sounds, he knew that the two were standing
close to the rock. He thought that they were facing the river, though he could
not be sure. It did not greatly matter. He inched that way until he could
faintly distinguish two upright blots in the darkness of the bowlder’s shadow.

Upon the taller of the two he launched himself, reaching instinctively for the
gun he knew was there. His hand closed on the cool steel of the barrel, and he
gave a mighty wrench as he went down. Young Jess, caught unawares from behind,
had no chance to save himself. Rawley landed full on his back, his chest
forcing the face of Young Jess into the gravel. His left hand gripped the back
of Jess’s neck.

“Peter, please take this fighting squaw to the house and lock her up
somewhere. Then come back here. I want to have a talk with you before I go,”
he said hardly. “I can handle this vermin, but I leave the squaw to you.”

“As you like,” Peter’s voice was noncommittal. “Come, Nevada.”

Rawley had expected some outburst from her, some bitter reply to his taunt.
But she went away with Peter and spoke no word to any one. So Rawley pulled
off his necktie and tied Young Jess’s hands behind him, and made himself a
smoke while he waited Peter’s return.

“I’ll git you, and I’ll git you right!” gritted Young Jess, when Rawley had
his cigarette going. “You better kill me now, or you’ll see the day you’ll be
begging me to kill yuh. I’ll ketch yuh and take yuh back in the mine, an’
I’ll--” He amused himself for some minutes, making up the programme of his
revenge. He would finish, he decided, by building a bed of powder kegs and
placing Rawley full length upon it, with a ten-foot fuse spitted just before
Young Jess bade him good-by.

“You ought to have lived fifty years ago,” Rawley commented indifferently, and
blew smoke in his face. “Why don’t yuh squeal for that old buzzard of a dad?
Maybe he could help yuh out, right now.”

Young Jess, having just made up his mind to shout for Old Jess to come, shut
his mouth so hard his teeth clicked like a dog cracking a bone.

“Any fool can plan the things he’d _like_ to do,” Rawley taunted. “What counts
is the fact that you’re on your back, right now, and that I put you there--and
you with a gun in your hands! I could kick you in the slats and make you howl
like a kicked pup. I could drive your teeth in, so you’d feed yourself in the
back of your head the rest of your life! Don’t talk to _me_--about what you’d
like to do! I’m liable to experiment on yuh, just to see how it works.”

Then Peter returned, and further social amenities were postponed to some
future meeting.




CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

“YOU TELL HOOVER I SAID SO!”


Las Vegas awoke one morning to find itself in the public eye. Destiny had so
decreed when it permitted Las Vegas to become the town nearest to the proposed
dam site at Boulder Canyon,--the largest governmental project undertaken for
many a day. The Panama Canal, said the orators (and no doubt they spoke the
truth), had not cost so much as it would cost to dam the Colorado River, to
conserve its tremendous power, to control its flood waters and put the river
to work tamely watering long rows of cotton, potatoes, great fields of grain.
Long enough had it gone leaping down through the wildest, most gorgeous
scenery in the country. Now it must be harnessed to new industries and become
the servant of plowboys, the friend of prospectors. It must pull trains across
the desert which it was to transform into tilled farms. It must keep several
States vibrant with the hum of machinery. It must make of the town of Las
Vegas a city worthy the name. One can’t blame Las Vegas for being particularly
interested in that phase of the project.

The town lay fairly under the eye of the Eagle,--and of the sun, whose light
the magic alchemy of the desert transmuted into soft tints on the mountains,
into a faint lavender glow on the desert. The air was still, with a little nip
to it that would later soften to a lazy warmth. A stranger to the desert,
standing on the depot platform, would have thought that he might walk quite
easily to Charleston Mountains, standing bold and stark against the western
sky line.

Down the flag-draped main street, coming from the side door of the little
post-office, a huge, good-natured negro leaned against a pushcart piled high
with dingy, striped canvas mail sacks. When he passed, certain belated
citizens swung out to the edge of the pavement and took longer steps, knowing
that the train was on time, and that the crowd would already be edging out
upon the platform. Automobiles with flags standing perkily from headlight
braces went careening past, to swing up into the parking space, trying their
nonchalant best to look as if they were not going to hold governors and high
officials of the Federal Government and carry them safely down to Boulder
Canyon, the most popular dam site on the Colorado.

A group of small boys dressed in white came marching down the street, stubbing
toes over the uneven places because they must keep their eyes on the music
while they played the uncertain strains of a march. They were very sleek as to
hair, very shiny as to cheeks and very solemn, those boys. Their mothers and
their fathers and their teachers were going to detect any false note or
flatted sharp and tell them about it afterwards. Besides, there aren’t many
boys who ever get a chance to stand on the platform and play when the
Governor’s train comes in--and be the only band on the job. They felt the deep
responsibility attendant upon the honor and thought feverishly of certain
spots in the music where they weren’t quite sure they could make it; not with
the whole town standing around listening.

They fumbled their instruments, stood hipshot and consciously unconcerned
while they waited for the train. Their leader glanced around the group,
encountered certain anxious pairs of eyes fixed upon his face, and made an
impulsive change in the programme. “The Star-Spangled Banner” was appropriate
and customary for such occasions, but there were treacherous high notes which
a certain scared boy might play flat, and other places where the slide
trombone was in danger of skidding. He gave them a piece they could play with
their eyes shut and was rewarded by hearing long sighs of relief here and
there among the musicians.

So it happened that when the train had slid into the station and the Governors
and high officials had descended from the private car, Rawley caught the
familiar air, “I’m forever blow-ing bubbles” floating out over the heads of
the assembled citizens of Las Vegas. If the tune wabbled here and there, what
matter? Governors and high officials can hear better music anywhere,--but they
never will hear a more sincere effort to please, made by more loyal hearts
than skipped beats under the white jackets of the “kid band” of Las Vegas.

    I’m dreaming dreams, I’m scheming schemes,
    I’m building castles high--

Rawley caught himself humming the words to himself and thought, in a heartsick
way, of Nevada, only twenty-five miles from him, so far as miles went,--a
million miles away in her thoughts.

“I’ve talked Boulder Canyon Dam until I wonder sometimes if it isn’t Bubble
Canyon, maybe,” a certain governor confided to him under his breath. “Do you
reckon this is a civic confession the kids are making, or what?”

“The civic air castle--nearest the kids can come to it,” Rawley grinned. “Wait
till you hear this town stand up on its hind legs and tell you how they feel
about it. They talk Boulder Canyon in their sleep, I reckon. It’s no bubble to
_this_ bunch! If the rest of the country had half the enthusiasm this town has
got, they’d be hauling concrete to the river to-day!”

“Instead of the Commission, huh? Well, I wish they were.”

A man pushed out of the fringe of common citizens who came merely to look upon
assembled greatness and faced Rawley, smiling with his eyes.

“Uncle Peter!” Rawley gripped his hand and did not know that his eyes searched
the crowd, wistfully, seeking a face--

“No, she didn’t come,” Peter informed him. “I want to get a chance to talk
with the men in your outfit who count the most. Not on paper, but with the
government. Can you fix it for me, boy?”

“Has anything happened?” Rawley drew him anxiously aside.

“No--I just want to get at the right men. I want you there, of course.” Peter
glanced here and there at the men who were smiling, shaking hands, speaking
pleasant phrases.

“All right. Of course every minute is mortgaged, I suppose, to the town. But
I’ll get you--”

“An hour will do me,” Peter stated modestly, and Rawley suppressed a grin.

Looking him over surreptitiously, Rawley decided that he could be very proud
indeed of Uncle Peter. Even amongst governors and such, Peter could hold his
own with that quiet dignity which nothing seemed able to ruffle, that poise
which came of being very sure of his own mind and of what he wanted. A great
man looked from one to the other curiously, and Rawley immediately introduced
Peter to him. Then he caught the eye of another, and presently that man was
shaking hands very humanly with Peter Cramer, who looked so much like George
Rawlins King, of the Reclamation Service. Before he quite realized what was
taking place, Peter was absorbed into the party of great men, and a flustered
waitress in the depot dining room was hastily making room at a table and
laying another knife and fork purloined from the lunch room outside.

The reception committee probably revised at the last minute their arrangements
for seating the party in the decorated automobiles. Some one must have been
crowded; but Peter rode in comfort in a big car in company with some of the
nation’s important men, though this was not what he had gotten an early
haircut for. He had seen the river in all its moods and under all conditions;
it seemed strange to him now, no doubt, to be sight-seeing it with men who had
heretofore been no more than names to be read in headlines in week-old
newspapers. But no one suspected it,--unless perhaps some member of the
reception committee wondered how he had broken in. However, as a guest of the
Colorado River Commission, seven governors and railroad presidents, no mere
local committee dared flicker an eyelid.

“It has to be done this way--whatever it is you want to do,” Rawley muttered
once in Peter’s ear at the river, when he caught Peter looking boredly at the
bold cliffs of Boulder Canyon. “You couldn’t get a look-in, just coming up and
trying for an interview. As soon as we get back, and before the banquet up
town, I’ve arranged for you to talk to the Commission. I told the chief,” he
added drily, “that it was more important than anything else he’d hear. I
gambled on that, because I know you. And a little nerve goes a long way,
sometimes. We’re going to cut this short as possible and get back to the car
early. Then--you’ll have to boil down your hour, Peter. There won’t be more
than half that much time for whatever it is you want to say.”

“It may pay this Colorado River Commission,” said Peter laconically, “to miss
their supper to-night, and even cut out some of the speeches they’ve got ready
to hand out to Vegas citizens. As I understand it, the Commission was created
for the purpose of investigating claims, collecting all data and adjusting
rights pertaining to the Colorado River. They’d better take a piece of bread
and butter in their hands and eat it while they listen to what I’ve got to
say.” He paused and added significantly, “You tell Hoover I said so.”




CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

THE VULTURE MAKES TERMS WITH THE EAGLE


Rawley had them rounded up in the private car--governors and high officials
and newspaper representatives--lighting cigars, cigarettes and pipes and
eyeing, their curiosity politely veiled, the big, broad-shouldered man with
the brown skin and piercing blue eyes, who stood at one end of the car waiting
for them to settle themselves into easy, listening attitudes. This was
informal,--but if they were to believe that keen young man, George Rawlins
King, it was going to be pretty important; and, what appealed to most of them
like a window opened in a stifling room, fresh and untalked. It is impossible
to eat, sleep and live with one subject for months without feeling a tingle of
relief when some entirely new angle crops up,--something that hasn’t been
argued, weighed and considered a hundred times. The Colorado River Commission
was on the job,--heart, soul and mind. But that did not preclude secret sighs
of anticipation when the Commission faced something wholly new to every
member.

Not a man among them knew Peter Cramer. Not one had ever heard the name. He
looked a man of the desert, every inch of his six-feet-and-something-over. He
might turn out to be a bore; he did not look like a boor. He did not wear his
hair in the prevailing fad; it grew thick to the nape of his neck and was
trimmed there neatly by some barber who remembered how they used to cut hair.
His dark suit was incontestably made to his measure,--but it had been made
before the War. You don’t get such material nowadays. At least, men of the
desert do not get it. His hands, as he shuffled a few slips of paper, showed
how hardly they had been used. They were the hands of a laborer, scrubbed
meticulously clean, the nails trimmed painstakingly,--with a pocket-knife, one
could guess. So there he stood, towering above them all, with pre-War clothes,
the hands of a laborer, the eyes of a thinker.

The car became very still. Every man there looked at Peter. And one man’s eyes
held love, sympathy and a shade of anxiety. To this moment, Rawley King could
only guess at what his Uncle Peter was going to say. There was a little prayer
in Rawley’s heart, in his eyes. A modern, young-man prayer, “God, don’t let
him pull a boner!” It would be well if all the prayers in all the churches
were as sincere.

“Gentlemen of the Colorado River Commission” (Peter began in his deep, even
voice that carried far) “you do not know me, and I do not know you. I thank
you for consenting to listen to me. When I am done, you may thank me for
consenting with myself to talk to you. In the words of a certain wise
man--whose wisdom I wish I might borrow as I borrow his words--‘I am not a
clever speaker in any way at all; unless, indeed, by a clever speaker they
mean a man who speaks the truth. You will not hear an elaborate speech dressed
up with words and phrases. I will say to you what I have to say, without
preparation and in the words which come first, for I believe that my cause is
just. So let none of you expect anything else.’ If I could better that
statement, make it more forceful, I should hesitate. Gentlemen, they stand for
absolute honesty of purpose. Let them stand for me now, as they stood for
Socrates--but I hope with happier effect.

“Fifty-four years ago, I was born within sight and sound of the Colorado River
and within sight of the cliffs of Black Canyon. The river has been a part of
my life. The wilderness hedged me in, mile upon mile. When I was ten, so long
ago as that, I was taught the use of a rifle that I might help defend lives
and property from hostile Indians and renegade white men. My mother is the
granddaughter of a chief, and the daughter of a Spanish nobleman who voyaged
up from Mexico before white men had seen this country. I am therefore
one-fourth Indian,--a son of the desert. My father was a white man of good
blood.

“When I was a boy and helped in my father’s mine at Black Canyon, I was urged
to greater labor by the great plan my father had conceived in his long labor
at the placer claims. He would save his gold until he had enough and more than
enough. Then, when he had gold enough, he would dam the flow of the Colorado
River and get the gold that lies in the river bed, washed down through the
ages.

“That plan became the splendid dream of my life, Gentlemen of the Commission.
The stupendousness of the idea took root in my very soul. I would stand and
watch the river hurrying past, and I would think how best it might be done,
and I would picture the river held back, halted in its headlong course to the
sea.

“When I was fifteen I was studying, in a small, groping way, the engineering
feat of damming the river at Black Canyon. I knew that I had a tremendous
problem before me. I knew that the problem was doubled by the need of secrecy,
which had been impressed upon me from the time I was a child. No one had
thought of getting the gold from the river bed. The river was too swift, its
currents too treacherous. I used to watch the steamboats warp up against the
sweep of that current, to make the landing at El Dorado. That gave me an idea
of the giant strength we should have to combat, to conquer. No one ever
suspected the purpose that grew within the minds of the ‘squaw man’ Cramer and
his breed boys, mining at Black Canyon. Deliberately we fostered the belief in
our commonplace lives, our lack of ambition, our ignorance. That belief,
gentlemen, was a necessary factor in our ultimate success.

“Studying alone--for my younger brother avoids thinking when possible, and my
father gave himself up wholly to the thought of getting the gold--I felt the
need of help from our great engineers. I could not take the time for college,
for studying in the schools that turn out engineers. I am a man of the desert,
as you see me. What I know I have learned by reading when others slept. I
could not give my working hours to study, for they were sold to the need of
getting gold to build the dam in order to get more gold! I alone realized the
magnitude of the undertaking; to me they looked for the wit to accomplish
their desire. And I remembered, gentlemen, the engineering problem solved by
half-savage peoples; their power is gone, but their engineering feats remain
to testify for them. I remembered the pyramids, some of the wonderful old
cathedrals of Europe, the marvelous ruined cities of the Incas, the Aztecs,--I
counted myself a savage who must think for himself, and I went at the problem
of making the splendid dream a reality.

“Gentlemen, when I was yet a boy I was experimenting with explosives. I was
studying the resistance of granite, the lifting power of black powder; I was
preparing to build the dam. Before I had books on the subject, I had measured
so many cubic feet of granite and had heaved it a certain distance with so
many pounds of black powder. Over and over again I did it, in spare time when
I was not working in the underground placer claims by the river.

“I will be brief, gentlemen, but I want to be understood by each one of you
before I stop talking. I told my father, when I was in my teens, that we must
have a million dollars before we could hope to carry out his idea. I told him
that we must have enough, or lose what we had. I showed him where failure to
dam the river would mean a total loss of time, money, labor. I convinced him
that I knew what I was talking about. I hope that I can convince you.

“Gentlemen, in order to dam the Colorado River and mine the gold in its bed,
for a distance of, say, a mile or two, you must make sure first of all of the
means, second of the secrecy of your plan, and third of the practicability of
the project. We had placer ground of unsuspected riches; an underground
watercourse with gravel bed, carrying placer gold. This gave us the means. We
simulated poverty and ignorance and a paucity of ambition, which gave us
immunity from suspicion that we had a secret to keep. And I made it my
business, gentlemen, to study the practical engineering problem.

“I had long ago chosen the spot for the dam; a point in the canyon where the
granite cliffs rise highest. I drew charts--” Peter glanced toward Rawley, and
his eyes twinkled “--of a system of underground workings which, when filled
with black powder augmented by light charges of dynamite, would break the
granite walls and heave them into the river. I worked upon the principle that
it would be better to use too much than not enough, and for fifteen
years--yes, for longer than that--I have been buying and storing black powder.
To-day, gentlemen, I have in place explosives which, with hush money that I
was compelled to pay for the secret, have cost approximately one hundred
thousand dollars. _In place!_ Wired, tamped with heavy cement, ready to go.
_Ready to shoot!_”

He looked from face to face, smiling while he waited for the information to
sink in. He saw certain newspaper men poise pencils before they set down the
sum, then scribble furiously.

“You didn’t know that, did you? No one has told the Colorado River Commission,
until now, when I am telling you, that twenty-five miles from here, in the
cliffs beside the river, there is at this moment peacefully reposing a giant
ready to rise up and fling rocks into the river, and lie back again when all
is done, to watch the Colorado halt in its headlong rush to the sea! I will be
more explicit, gentlemen.

“In the cliffs, _ready to shoot_--bear that always in mind--I have five
hundred thousand pounds of blasting powder, and fifty thousand pounds of forty
per cent. dynamite, so disposed that, fired simultaneously on both sides of
the river, the volume of rock will meet midway and drop into the channel. Some
distance up the river, I have an auxiliary dam built, ready to blow at a
moment’s notice if the main dam seems in danger of not holding against the
terrific pressure of the Colorado’s flow.

“Incidentally--I had nearly forgotten to tell you--I have perhaps the oldest,
most complete private record of the flow, rise and fall of the Colorado River
in existence. The record goes back thirty-nine years, gentlemen. I still use a
gauge which I invented when I was about fifteen, and I find that it is
practical, though crude.

“I have planned the auxiliary dam, as I call it, to check and help hold the
pressure against the main dam, if necessary. In flood time the force is
terrific; I have provided against that. The auxiliary dam, if thrown in, will
give me time to strengthen the main dam. I have not expected that one big
blast will end the matter. Once that is in, and further secrecy impossible, I
shall be prepared to rush one hundred men, whose names and addresses I have on
file, to work with compressors (two on each side of the river, each one
portable and capable of running three drills each--with jack hammers and
expert men behind them). These will rush another system of undermining, so
that a second installment of Black Canyon can be heaved in upon the first.

“You will bear in mind, gentlemen, that we are first in the field by a good
many laborious years. I grant you that the idea was born in greed. The eye of
the vultures have dwelt upon the gold in the river, these fifty years. But
even the vulture must give way to the Eagle. I have seen the wing of the Eagle
spread, and its shadow has touched our dam in Black Canyon. Gentlemen, the
vulture has come to make terms with the Eagle.”

That, for reasons best known to the Commission, was applauded. A great man
asked a question.

“How much, approximately, have you spent in this undertaking?”

Peter glanced down at a slip of paper in his hand.

“It is something I have waited to tell you. I divided our capital into
budgets, as follows:

“A dredger, now waiting at Needles to be towed up the river, four hundred
thousand dollars. (That, of course, is our personal property and need not be
considered in our negotiations, if any are carried on.) Fund for payment of
damages to property caused by blasting, one hundred thousand dollars. (That, I
thought, should pay for all the windows and crockery we may break, and that
remains in bank until such time as we need it.) Property bought along the
river above the dam site, which may be inundated, fifty thousand. Incidental
expenses covering a period of years, fifty thousand. Explosives, wiring,
battery and cement--with hush money paid out--one hundred thousand dollars.

“The explosives, gentlemen, I should expect the government to buy, if you take
over our dam; which I hope that you will do. I have no desire now to infringe
upon the rights of the government, even if I could. The project has been my
life’s work. The achievement in itself has been the big dream of my life. If
it will be of any service to you, if your engineers find my idea a practical
one, I shall feel that my life so far has been well-spent. I had an idea that
our dredger might still be used in the river bed to extract the gold. We have
claims on both sides of the river. I have hoped that we might still be able to
operate our dredger, paying a royalty to the government on whatever gold we
may take out. If that is impossible, then we shall be obliged to unload our
dredger for whatever we can get for it.

“Finally, gentlemen, I must urge you to extend your stay in Las Vegas, so that
you may see our dam, and understand more fully what I have been trying to make
plain to you: That _we have a dam_, ready to shoot within an hour’s
notice--yes, in fifteen minutes from the time you say the word. I believe that
it will hold. You may find that, by reënforcing it, by building spillways and
preparing for your canals, our dam will be of real, practical benefit to
you--put you that much farther along the trail. Give you something concrete to
work to, something besides politics, talk, theories, factions. It’s there.
It’s ready to speak its little piece to-morrow, if you like--though I am not
so ignorant as to speak seriously of that. I merely wish to point my
information, make it definite. You, or you, or you, could go down to our
place, and if I told you just where I have hidden the battery, you could hook
it up to our wires and dam the Colorado--like that.” He snapped the fingers he
had pointed and stood waiting. And while he waited, no man in that car did
more than breathe, and look at Peter, and think rapidly, with some
consternation, of the significance of his information.

“Gentlemen, I have finished. I should like to show you the Cramer Dam,
to-morrow. It may upset your schedule, just as I am making you late for the
banquet, which is probably waiting and cooling at this moment. But, gentlemen,
it will pay you to upset your schedule. It will pay you to take the time and
walk the two or three miles between the nearest road and the dam. Until you do
see the Cramer Dam, which I now publicly announce as being completed, you are
not fully qualified to make your report, if report you must make, to the
Secretary of the Interior, or whoever receives and passes upon your findings
in the matter. Gentlemen, I thank you.”




CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

FATE HAS DECREED


“I should like to say just here, if I may, that many of the astonishing facts
as Mr. Cramer has placed them before you I can vouch for from my own personal
knowledge.” Rawley was on his feet, turned toward Peter’s audience. “Just
before the war, I was permitted to look over the work on the Cramer
Dam”--privately, Rawley liked the way Uncle Peter had dignified the dam by
giving it a name which would hereafter identify it to the public--“which at
that time was uncompleted. I did not approve of their project, but I will say
that I was personally in sympathy with it.

“In considering the facts which Mr. Cramer has presented to you, I am taking
the liberty of asking you to bear in mind that I am willing to vouch for their
authenticity. And in explanation of my silence on the subject, I will say that
I went to the Cramers and urged them to abandon their project, since it would
interfere with the reclamation plans of the government. I did not know, until
he stated their position in the matter just now, what stand they meant to
take.”

He sat down, and his chief nodded approvingly. It was perfectly apparent to
Peter that his cause would be none the worse for Rawley’s championship. He
glowed to see how friendly they all were with Rawley. Also, it surprised his
unsophisticated soul to observe the ease and familiarity with which these men
comported themselves. Headliners in the newspapers, every one of them save the
reporters themselves, he had half expected them to retain their platform
manners in private. They were just men, after all, he decided, and turned to
answer the questions of a great man as easily as he would have answered
Rawley.

The committee of entertainment waited a bit for their guests of honor, that
night. From the manner in which the talk slid into other and more accustomed
channels the moment others entered the car, Peter gathered that Las Vegas
would continue for a time in ignorance of what had been going on under its
nose for so long. It tickled him to picture the amazement and incredulity when
the Commission should make its announcement. Or perhaps Las Vegas would read
it in the city papers first. They would be slow to believe that the obscure
family of Cramers could put over a thing like that and keep it under cover all
these years.

At the banquet in the town hall, Peter listened to Rawley’s dazed enthusiasm
calmly while he watched the crowd. This was the first banquet which Peter had
ever attended--a man confessing to fifty-four years and quoting Socrates!--and
he was interested. But Rawley would not let him enjoy himself as he would
like; instead, he must tell why and why and why; a tiresome job for Peter.

“Oh, I didn’t lack confidence, boy. I wanted your opinion without any
influence from me. If I’d told you all I knew, that wouldn’t have helped _me_
any. I wanted to know what _you_ knew about it. Then I compared your ideas
with mine.

“No, Jess and the old man don’t know what I’m up to. I talked to them, some,
after you left. But they can’t see beyond the gold in the river. They’ll be
mad, I expect. But we couldn’t go on the way we planned. You can’t fight the
government, boy. The old Eagle is a real scrapper.

“Yes, Nevada knows I intended to fly a white flag. She’s willing. She sees, as
I do, that you were right--”

Peter’s neighbor on the other side claimed him then; an engineer who wanted
further details of just how Peter had planned to move a mountain and cast it
into the river. Two men across the table left off eating and their talk to
lean forward and listen, and the man next Rawley was frankly stretching his
hearing across and catching as much of Peter’s elucidation as he could. So
Rawley was obliged to content himself with his pride in Uncle Peter, who was
plainly making an extremely favorable impression on certain governors and high
officials. And it amused him secretly to observe Peter’s complete unconcern
over his growing popularity and his childlike interest in the commonplace
incidents of the banquet.

An ambitious reporter slipped up behind Rawley and asked him for the love of
Mike to arrange an interview with Cramer. His tone was imploring.

“New dope--and oh, boy, it’s a hummer!” he confided in Rawley’s ear. “You know
we pencil pushers are just about goofy, trying to get a fresh punch into this
thing. This man, Cramer, is worth a million dollars to the project, just for
the publicity there is in him. A dam under our noses--oh, _boy_!”

“He won’t talk,” Rawley discouraged him. “Taciturn is the word that describes
him.”

“Taciturn? With that talk he put over this evening? I’ve got every word of
it--it’s priceless. Arabian Nights ain’t in it. And believe me, King, it’s
going on the wires complete, the minute we get the word to release it.”

“Let’s see,” Rawley mused. “You’re an A. P. man, aren’t you? Well, I’ll try
and run Peter into a corner for you--but I won’t promise he’ll give you
anything.”

“You, then! King, you’re wise--I can see it in your left eyebrow. You’ve got
some ripping dope on this, and I know it. Say, if you’ll--”

The toastmaster had risen and was rapping a spoon against his plate. The
ambitious scribe and the human beehive subsided, but Rawley observed that the
reporter had pulled up a chair and was preparing to camp at his elbow and
Peter’s. Well, why not? he thought headily. A man like Peter could go far in
the world, give him a chance. And this might be the chance. A desert man who
spoke calmly of budgeting a million dollars, the savings of a lifetime for
three men, to spend in secret upon a project over which the whole nation was
arguing, and who could make a talk like that the first time he ever faced
great men was, to say the least, unusual.

He glanced sidelong at Peter, who had straightened and folded his arms,
gravely prepared to give his full attention to the speakers. There would be no
word out of him now, Rawley knew. As well expect a devout old lady to divulge
her recipe for piccalilli in church. He turned his head and whispered behind
his hand to the reporter:

“Stick around. I’ll do what I can.”

The reporter patted his shoulder gratefully, and Rawley came to attention,
stifling a yawn. It was so like every other banquet, and the speeches were so
like all the other speeches on the same subject! He listened with the same
bored loyalty with which the workers in the Liberty Loan drives and all the
other drives toiled through their patriotic programme night after night, day
after day. It did not lessen their patriotism that the workers sometimes
wearied of the same old arguments, the stereotyped appeals to the patriotism
of the public. He wished that Peter might rise and say what he had said to the
Commission, a couple of hours ago. That would open their eyes!

However, the speeches which were so old to the visiting great ones were not
old to Las Vegas, and they were not old to Peter. There was the usual appeal
for sympathy with the project under the direct supervision of the government,
to which Peter listened closely, his head turned a bit sidewise so that he
would not miss a word of it. The reporter was quietly sketching his profile on
a small pad, but Peter never guessed that.

A tall, lean man from California was speaking. He was the fourth or fifth on
the programme, and the audience was restive under his voice, wanting to hear
from the greatest of the great men there. The greatest of the great men was
listening courteously with half his mind, while the other half was divided
between an aching desire to crawl into his berth and forget the whole darned
thing for a few hours, and recasting a certain story which might be used with
effect at the beginning of his talk,--unless Las Vegas was too familiar with
it. His colleagues knew the thing backward; but then, when one has traveled
much with a certain group, speaking valiantly at every stop in behalf of one’s
cause, one’s colleagues are going to be bored anyway when one starts speaking,
so that their desires are never considered. The same old stuff is always
new,--provided one has always a new audience before one.

“Ladies and gentlemen,” the speaker was crying enthusiastically, “you can’t
get away from the fact that progress is ever marching onward. The hand of
Opportunity is lifted, knocking at your door! Whether you open or not--upon
that rests your future. You can’t get away from it. One day (and that day is
not far distant, ladies and gentlemen), you will awake to find yourselves in
the midst of great, growing industries. The mighty river at your very door,
ladies and gentlemen, will be at work for the Nation! The full measure of her
might, ladies and gentlemen, will be _at your service_! Can such a stupendous
thing as that, ladies and gentlemen, be placed in the hands of private
interests? I say, _no_!” (The tall, lean man did not say it, he thundered the
words.) “I say, no man, no group of individuals, can do a thing like that! No
man--”

A queer, sickening lurch of the building, forward and back, a shattering of
windows drowned his voice completely. You know how it is when an earthquake
intrudes upon your little thoughts, your infinitesimal activities. You
suddenly know that you are nothing at all. Your very soul sickens before a
mightier than thou. So it was at the banquet.

The tall, lean man’s plate leaped at him, and a custardy dessert which he had
not touched,--on account of dyspepsia--was deposited on his clothing in
splotches. He started for the door, enraged because every one else was also
starting for the door.

Came a terrific, booming roar like the rolling up of the heavens into a
scroll,--done carelessly and in haste. Women shrieked. Men shouted
unintelligibly under the impression that they were doing something to quell
the panic.

Peter, stunned for a minute, jumped upon the table, one heel crunching a dish
of salted almonds devastatingly. His great voice boomed above the tumult and
stilled it, while each person looked to see what and why he was speaking.

“Ladies and gentlemen, that’s all. There won’t be any more. Folks, like it or
not, you’ve got a dam in the Colorado River! She’s dammed, right this minute.
It’s an accident, a slip-up in the plans, but--_she’s there_. You just heard a
chunk of Black Canyon go into the river. The man that made the last speech
said it couldn’t be done. It _is_ done. Now, the government will have to do
whatever else is to be done. Ladies and gentlemen, you have just heard the
Cramer Dam go in!”

That stopped the panic automatically. Men and women waited to hear more. They
were accustomed to blasting, if that were all. They accepted Peter’s statement
that this was all of it, though the women were still white, still inclined to
clutch their husbands and sweethearts and wonder if they were going to faint.
Las Vegas was dazed. The Colorado Commission was collectively looking at Peter
through narrowed lids.

Peter glanced down into the measuring, weighing eyes of the greatest man
present. He flushed at what he read there, and he answered the look.

“It’s my fault,” he said simply. “I ought to have tied ’em up, or brought ’em
with me. I should have placed a guard over that dam. I did hide the
battery--but they must have found it.”

At a sudden thought he threw out both hands in the gesture with which a strong
man meets the inevitable.

“Gentlemen,” he cried, and his voice was a challenge. “Fate has decreed that
the thing should go through! I had no knowledge of this, but--” his eyes
darkened and twinkled, the endearing King smile softened his face suddenly
“--gentlemen, if you will stop over a day, I should like to show you the
Cramer Dam, _completed_!”

He looked at the great engineer who had questioned him during dinner.

“_You_ said it couldn’t be done! I’m not a gambling man, Mr. Brown, but I’ll
bet you fifty thousand dollars against fifty cents, that _she’s there_!”

The man he challenged looked up at him. Slowly, as his thought crystallized,
the blood drained out of the engineer’s face, leaving it dead white. He turned
to his chief, but his voice went to the farthest corner of the hall.

“My God! What if she holds a while! Warn Needles, Yuma--send out a general
warning below! Tell the people to hunt the highest points they can reach!
Gentlemen, if that damned Cramer Dam holds for forty-eight hours, there’ll be
the greatest disaster in the history of the West!”

The A. P. man leaped chairs, bowled over men on his way to the door. After him
came the banqueters in a senseless rush.




CHAPTER THIRTY

DAWN AND THE RIVER


On the street men were guessing wild. An explosion had taken place,--every one
knew that. The majority guessed that the powder magazine at Searchlight had
blown up; though as a matter of fact they were not certain that Searchlight
had a powder magazine.

The more impulsive were already tearing down the road in automobiles, without
any very definite notion of where they were headed for. As is customary in
such cases, every man who had a tongue had also an opinion which he was eager
to impart to somebody, and was unable to find any one who would listen to him.

Into this confusion the A. P. man burst like a rocket shot off accidentally.
He was on his way to the telegraph office on the second floor of the depot,
and he meant to arrive there ahead of the others so that he could be sure of a
clear wire to cover the story. Besides, he had been impressed with the need of
haste in warning people below. Yet he found time to shout the news to a group
of men as he passed them.

“Colorado’s dammed!” he cried, and did not wait to explain how it should be
spelled. Wherefore Las Vegas guessed harder than ever until men less hurried
arrived from the banquet hall and told just what had happened. Immediately
thereafter, every man who owned a car cranked up and got going in the
direction of Black Canyon. The Governor of the State stayed a while to give
certain orders and to make sure that they would be promptly obeyed.

Peter laid a detaining hand upon the arm of a shrewd young lawyer whom he knew
slightly, and who had studied him intently while Peter explained to the
banqueters the commotion. The young lawyer instinctively drew aside from the
throng, to a clear space where confidences might be indulged in. But Peter was
brief.

“Here’s a check. It’s good for ten thousand. You advertise that people with
smashed windows and so on can have the damage made good. Get a contractor,
have him investigate all complaints, and then fix things up. I’ll see you in a
day or so. I’m going to the river to see what’s happened. You attend to the
damages here.”

He did not wait until the lawyer consented to accept the job, but left him
standing there, the check in his hands, an unlighted cigar in his mouth. Peter
was just climbing into the big car that drew up to the curb for him, when the
A. P. man--his name was Jerry Newton, by the way--sprinted a half-block and
landed on the running board.

“Sent out a general alarm,” he puffed, “and got the news to headquarters.
Cramer’s speech--wrote it during the feed. Had a hunch I might have to make it
snappy. Needles and Yuma will get word to the ranchers--if the big splash
holds off a couple of hours they think they can reach everybody, practically.
Anybody got a cigar? Never had time to eat a bite.”

“You’re out of luck, then,” Peter informed him. “No chance till breakfast,
now.”

Rawley swung round upon them from the front seat, where he was to pilot the
driver. His voice was strained and unnatural.

“The--folks would know enough to get out of danger, wouldn’t they, Uncle
Peter?”

“They would,” Peter said grimly, “if they had any warning.”

“You don’t think it was an accident, surely!” As Rawley spoke, others leaned
to listen for Peter’s reply.

“I know I found a doctor,--he’s going to follow at our tail light. I hid the
battery where Jess and the old man couldn’t find it. The rest we’ll know when
we get there.” Peter’s exultation had left him completely. He sat back in a
corner of the wide seat and said no more. And by that, Rawley knew that Peter
was worried.

The reporter was saying that Needles had reported every window in town broken
by the concussion.

“Of course they counted, in the five minutes they must have had before you
wired,” Rawley exclaimed irritably. If Peter was worried over the folks in the
basin, then Rawley knew that there was cause. He told the driver to “hit ’er
up, the road’s good”, and thereby gained some minutes and gave some great men
a jolting.

They left the road to Black Canyon and went on to Nelson. They could drive to
the river that way, and one glance would tell them whether the dam was
holding. That was important. The Governor of the State having called for help,
it was necessary to see first of all what the river was doing below the
dam,--if dam there were.

Several cars fell in behind them, no doubt cognizant of the fact that the
Governor, Peter and the great engineer were in the first automobile, and that
they knew where they were going. So it was a swift procession that swung up
over the summit and down into El Dorado Canyon.

The September moon was lingering upon a mountain top, loath to withdraw its
gaze from the crippled river he had watched over all these ages long. Peter
was first out of the car, which, for reasons readily apprehended, he had
stopped well up the wash. If the dam was holding so long, there would be a
great, engulfing wave when it broke, and the longer the dam held, the greater
the flood.

“The river’s high for this time of year, on account of the storms in the
mountains,” the chief engineer of the party informed them superfluously, since
the occurrence was sufficiently unusual to have excited comment before now.
“She’s running close to fifty thousand second feet,--or was, when we left
Needles yesterday.” He turned to Peter with courteous criticism; not for him
was it to censure or judge, but he ventured a remark nevertheless which
betrayed his own personal belief.

“You should have waited until the edge of winter before you let that charge
loose. This is an unusual year, I grant; but with your knowledge of the river,
you must know the danger of attempting to dam it while there is so great a
discharge.”

The group hurried its pace to listen, but Peter, in the lead, seemed wholly
unconscious of criticism and listeners alike. He was absorbed by his own
thoughts, his own fears.

“It was madness to do it now, in any case,” he agreed simply. “For years we’ve
talked of shooting it during September, when the water begins to lower
definitely for the winter months. That would give us the longest possible time
for strengthening the dam. If this wasn’t a sheer accident, it was done by a
madman,--the vulture who feared the Eagle would snatch away his feast. I know
of no better simile. Gentlemen, I fear you will have to cope with a madman who
ran amuck when he discovered my absence and feared that I would betray the
whole scheme to the government. He could see nothing but disaster in that. If
he deliberately blew up the dam, it was with a crazy notion of forestalling
the government. I don’t know; I hid the battery.”

He was leading them up on the high bank on the north side of the wash by a
narrow trail he knew. Even in his haste he remembered that the lives of great
men must not be placed in danger, and he had not needed the reminder of the
engineer that it was a risky proceeding, blowing in the dam at the height of
this sporadic high water. Not so high as to overflow its banks, it is true,
but with not too wide a margin of safety, either.

No man there knew better than Peter what an unexpected breakage would do, no
man there felt more keenly the elements of disaster, once his first exultation
over their disbelief had passed; a flare of triumph over the wise ones. Peter
had been on that river just yesterday. His launch was still at Needles, where
he had left it to take the train for Barstow. He had arrived in Las Vegas on
the train which brought the private car of the Commission. He had planned it
so, to be sure of seeing them, and also to conceal his errand from the two
Cramers, whose rage would not have stopped at murder, it is likely, had they
known what was in his mind.

When Peter had embarked in his launch, the river was running forty-three
thousand second feet. He had looked at the gauge. He had not known how the
government gauge had read at Needles when his train left there, but he did not
doubt the word of the engineer. There had been unusual, heavy storms in
Colorado, Wyoming, Utah. An edge of it had swept his own State. To attempt to
dam that sweeping flood was, as he had named it, madness.

Once up the bank they walked rapidly. Rawley, glancing back, saw other
automobiles stop behind their car, and men trailing after them up the bank. It
was a somewhat circuitous route; he wondered if his party would follow Peter
so patiently if they knew that they could have driven to the water’s edge.
They were walking half a mile when they might have ridden. But Peter was
taking no risk.

They reached the high bank of the river just as the moon slipped--like the
face of a boy who has been peering over a stone wall and who has lost his
footing--dropped suddenly out of sight, and left the river dark, the far hills
gilded tantalizingly with its white light. The party halted.

“She’s dammed,” Peter said tersely.

“I can hear it running,” some one objected.

“I know every sound of this river,” said Peter impatiently. “I’ve listened to
it all my life. You hear a seepage fighting the rocks in the channel. It’s no
bigger than a trout stream now. This way, gentlemen.”

In the blackness before dawn, made blacker to them by the sudden desertion of
the moon, Peter struck into the burro trail Rawley knew so well.

The familiar path brought a sharp longing for Nevada, whom he had left in
anger some months before. Of course she had not been plotting with Young Jess
against him! Once his hurt pride let him think clearly, Rawley knew that she
had been trying to save him. She would naturally suppose that they had gone
straight toward the canyon, and she was encouraging Jess to waste time looking
among the rocks, never dreaming that they were there. Many a time Rawley
cursed the King temper for letting him taunt her with her Indian blood. He had
wanted to hurt. His instinct had led him to the words that would sting
sharpest, even though she believed him as much Indian as herself.

Men before him and behind were talking--short-breathed over the pace Peter was
unconsciously setting them--of the dam, its probable strength and the danger
of a disastrous flood if it held a while and then failed to hold. Rawley
walked among them, thinking of Nevada, wondering if she would ever forgive him
for what he had said to her. Strangely enough, of Young Jess’s hate and
promised revenge he did not think at all. Nevada’s resentment, her
forgiveness,--these were the things that mattered. The dam was an incident, a
job for others to handle. Rawley’s whole thought was of persuading a girl to
forget a dozen words which he had spoken in blind fury.

Then, looking across at the piled hills beyond the river (the hills of
Arizona), the white radiance faded, chilled, merged into the crepuscule that
threatened to deepen again to darkness. The moon was retreating before the
coming of the sun.

The twilight brightened, pulled lavender and rose from the dawn and spread
over the hills a radiant, opal-tinted veil. The great men stopped and faced
the dawn, and forgot the problems set by the great Teacher for human minds to
solve, and, in the solving, grow to greater things. The Governor removed his
hat and stood, head bared, waiting for the coming of the sun. The heralds
flung banners of royal purple and gold. The hills laid aside the thin veil of
enchantment and spread a soft carpet of gray and brown.

The King appeared, a ruddy disk with broad bars of purple cloud before his
face. The heavens blazed with the glory of a new day. Somewhere behind them,
in hidden mesquite bush, a mocking bird began singing reverently its morning
aria.

Eyes left the savage wonder of the wilderness greeting the dawn and dropped to
the crippled Colorado.

In a dark canyon drab bars of silt stretched like gigantic crocodiles upon the
river’s bed, with the shiny humps of moss-slimed bowlders in between. Rosy
pools of still water reflected the barbaric dawn clouds above. Ridges of
water-worn gravel. A thin swift current was fighting the huge rocks in the
channel with a great splutter and turmoil of spray flung up. Smaller streams
were worming impatiently aslant the river bed to join the stream fighting so
valiantly in the channel.

Already the main current was yielding, choked by the neighbor mountain that
had suddenly assailed it from above. Against the rocks the sun painted
inexorably the mark of its surrender.

Peter looked down upon the river bed and saw his splendid dream come true. For
a moment his exultation returned. He looked at the Governor.

“I believe, sir, that the Cramer Dam is a complete success!” A ringing note of
pride was in his voice.




CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

THE VULTURE FEASTS


They walked on, heads turned toward the spectacle. The sun, rising higher,
splashed a mellow light into the deep crannies between the bowlders, set the
bald pates of smoothed granite rocks a-gleam,--rocks never before uncovered in
the history of man.

Rawley turned and looked curiously at Peter, whose eyes were upon the river
bed while his feet stumbled along the trail. They were anxious to reach the
dam, every man of them. The engineer was stepping out briskly, keen glances
going to the cliffs up-river; but for all their haste they could not forebear
to gaze down at the stark, denuded canyon bottom, where a great river had been
halted in its headlong rush.

“Well, Uncle Peter, you’ve had your wish,” Rawley said at last. “You said you
were waiting for the day when you could show the Colorado who was boss. You
wanted to stop it. It’s stopped.”

Peter looked at him, smiling faintly.

“I was just thinking of Johnny Buffalo, that last night,” he said, speaking so
that the others, straggling along the trail, would not hear. “What was that he
said? ‘You will succeed, and fail in the succeeding. And from the failure you
will rise to greater things’--or something like that. It just struck me. I
wonder if he meant,--this.” He tilted his head toward the river. “I’ve
succeeded. I’ve stopped the Colorado, and shown it who’s boss. But it isn’t
like I dreamed it, after all. I’ve got a hunch, boy, that we’ll never work
that dredger. Maybe the government will have other ideas about that. It was a
self-centered plan, I admit that now. It had no right to succeed. The folks
below need the river. I hadn’t figured them into the calculations at all.”

Jerry Newton overheard that last observation and stepped faster until he was
just behind them.

“Did you ever see a flood, Mr. Cramer? I covered Pueblo and several other
places; was down South, that last big one. Families down below here are
getting out,--and believe me, they are making it snappy! I’ll bet you couldn’t
find a breakfast cooked in its own kitchen, down below here, to save your
life! They know what a flood means, and this is going to be like the crack o’
doom when it comes. Sudden, what I mean. They’ve been tickling the gas levers,
believe me, since that blast went off.”

Peter turned and looked at him, frowning.

“What makes you all take it for granted the dam won’t hold?” he queried
resentfully. “It would, I’d stake my life on it almost, though it should have
been shot in low water, or falling water. This high water is not going to
last. It’s the run-off of a big general storm, and I believe the peak is past,
anyway. You don’t realize the size of the Cramer Dam. And you seem to forget
altogether the auxiliary dam that can be thrown in, any time it seems
necessary.”

Jerry Newton saw the point, but he saw something else, and being a blunt young
man by nature, he blurted a retort.

“If you’re so sure of its holding, Mr. Cramer, what are you so worried about?”

Peter’s eyes hardened.

“Lives, young fellow. Two of them dear to me.”

The A. P. man was silenced. He looked contritely at Peter’s back, but he could
not think of anything to say.

“Look there!” The engineer, hurrying along in the lead, stopped and pointed.
“That’s what I call enterprise. But it’s taking a chance I shouldn’t care
about, myself.”

The party pulled up, facing the river. They had reached the lower edge of the
basin, about where Rawley and Johnny Buffalo had camped. The bank here was
high and rocky as the canyon opened slowly its mouth. The river had been
forced to a narrower channel, and it held therefore a deeper bed.

Away down there in the middle of it, almost at the edge of the channel
fighting still to hold its own, a bent figure was groping, bent almost double,
eyes to the ground. Now and then it knelt and clawed in slimy pools. Then it
went on, inch by inch, like a child picking pretty pebbles on a beach.

“Old Jess!” cried Rawley. “Peter, it’s Old Jess! Call to him! He’ll step into
a hole--there’s quicksand--or if the dam breaks--”

“He’s crazy!” several of the party spoke the words at once, as sometimes
happens, unconsciously forming an impromptu chorus. “Call him out of there!”

“He wouldn’t come!” Peter was starting toward the edge, seeking a trail down.
Rawley, running ahead to the place where he used to bring up water, was down
before him.

“Go back! I’ll get him,” shouted Peter, scrambling after, and those left at
the top gesticulated and shouted.

“You go back,” Rawley cried over his shoulder. “One’s enough!” Then, having
reached the bottom, he started out.

The vulture saw them, and flapped his arms and screamed vituperations in a
reasonless rage, greed-mad, thinking they were come to rob him.

Slipping, sliding among the bowlders that piled the river bed in places, the
two ran out, instinctively avoiding the treacherous bars of engulfing mud that
lay upstream from some larger obstruction, the deep pools where fish were
leaping. Neither would turn back. Both men realized that.

The vulture picked up a rock as big as his fist and threatened them with it.
They went on, straight for him. Old Jess gave a maniacal scream, hurled the
rock and fled. Rawley ducked. But Peter, coming just behind him, was caught in
the chest. He lurched, slipped on a slimy spot and went down backward on a
rock.

Rawley did not see. He was hot after the old man, who ran awkwardly, his
pockets weighted so that they sagged the full stretch of the cloth, a sample
bag over his shoulder knocking heavily against his back. He headed straight
for the current that boiled, a miniature Colorado, in the channel.

He meant to jump it and gain the other side. He had lost all sense of
proportion. He did not see that a horse could scarcely clear the racing flood.
Rawley shouted a warning just as Old Jess reached the brink. The old vulture
gave a scream, sprang out, and the current caught him and dragged him down.

Rawley ran for a few steps down the plunging stream, put one foot in the
quicksand and hurled himself back just in time. The black, tumbled object that
was Old Jess whirled on.

“The river never gives up its dead; he said it himself,” Rawley exclaimed in
an awed tone to Peter, and turned. But Peter was not behind him, as he had
supposed. Then he saw him lying among a litter of small, mossy rocks.

Up on the bank men were shouting, pointing upriver when Rawley heaved Peter up
on his back and started picking his way toward shore. Rawley glanced up, saw
the stretched arms, looked, and began running.

Up the river, close against shore, looking as if it were hugging the rocks for
protection, a narrow, white line came leaping down upon him. The Colorado was
not a river to submit tamely to the will of man. It had found a weak spot
close inshore, and in the few hours that it had been fretting against its
barrier, it had eaten a way through. Now a slim skirmisher came surging down
through the tunnel the water had made.

Men scrambled down the bluff toward him; well-groomed men with patent leathers
that slipped on the steep bank. They could not help, but neither could they
stand up there with their hands in their pockets and watch.

Rawley did not see them. He did not see that gamboling white line, after the
first glance. He did not see anything, save the next place where he must set
his foot, the next mud bar which he must avoid. His shoulders were bent under
the two-hundred-pound weight of a man he loved as he had never before loved
any man, and he knew that safety might lie in a second,--in one long stride.

The rocks seemed to grow more slippery, more slimy as he went on. The mud
banks seemed to slide in upon him. He had to turn back once, just in time to
avoid a patch of ooze. He imagined that the shore receded, or that he stood
still and moved his feet in one spot. But he fought that notion and forced
himself to believe that he was making time against the small, devouring flood
that was racing down at him. He kept telling himself that the water had twice
as far to travel in order to engulf him as he must go to escape it.

He was right. The water had farther to travel, and he made time. Indeed, the
spectators swore that he made a new record for speed. Running with two hundred
pounds on his back was a feat for any man on smooth going, they told him. Over
that course, it was not an achievement at all; it was a miracle.

However that may be, Rawley used his last ounce of energy to reach the bank. A
gloved hand reached down and caught him. Its mate seized the other wrist. He
gave a final dig with his toes and a scrambling wriggle, and crawled up as
some one pulled Peter off his back and the small torrent swept past.

On a shelf of rock above the watermark he lay back for a minute to breathe
before he essayed to climb the high bank. He looked down at the rush of water,
his eyes wide.

“Lord, I thought it was the whole river coming at me!” he panted disgustedly,
looking up into the face of the Governor, whose hand had reached down to him.
“Why, I could jump that,--almost.”

“Hardly, with a load,” the Governor retorted. “And then, the whole dam may
give way at any moment, now it has started.”

Peter stirred and struggled to sit up. His dazed eyes went down to the new
torrent. The sight stung him to full consciousness. He came up like a lion
wounded but full of fight.

“Come on! We’ve got to shoot in that auxiliary dam,” he shouted thickly.
“I--was going to--anyway. And let this flood down--easy.”




CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

ANOTHER RESCUE


“Going to try for a rescue of the--body?” Jerry Newton looked up from fussing
with one of the best small cameras on the market to-day. He had “got” that
dramatic race with the flood, and he made no apologies for his enterprise. It
was his business to get such scenes.

The Governor pressed his lips together and pointed downward.

“We’re going to save the living,” he said. “Where’s that doctor?”

A shrewd-eyed, tanned man was already feeling of Peter’s skull with finger
tips that seemed to own a detached intelligence.

“Just a simple contusion,” he announced cheerfully. “Put you to sleep for a
minute, though, didn’t it? Here. I’ll fix you up in two shakes so you’ll feel
like new. Let’s have a look at your chest.”

In five minutes Peter was standing steadily on his own feet, ready to go.
Rawley caught his somber glance at the place where Old Jess had disappeared
and shook his head, unconsciously aping the Governor.

“No use, Uncle Peter. I tried to get him. It’s running like a mill race. He
landed square in the middle of it.”

“He did this.” Peter swept his arm out toward the bared river bed while his
eyes sought the Governor’s. “Crazy,--you saw that. My half-brother would have
more sense. The old man did it, to get the gold before the government could
beat him to it.”

He looked from one face to another trying to choose who stood highest in rank.

“I want permission,” he said more firmly, as the doctor’s stimulant took hold,
“to go ahead now and carry out my plans. I warn you, gentlemen, that if that
is not done there may be a great flood. Let me go ahead and shoot in that
auxiliary dam _now_. That will relieve the pressure until we can shoot in more
rock here. If I hold back the flood for you, at my expense, you can do as you
think best with me afterwards, and with the river.”

He threw out a hand toward the mutinous inshore stream.

“That dam is all rock; tons upon tons of it. Inshore is where a channel could
eat through. The cliffs overhang and would prevent a full drop there of broken
rock. I counted on this. It was my natural run-off. If it broke through
anywhere, it would break here. Nature’s a pretty good engineer, gentlemen. But
we’ll make it a safe proposition. We’ll shoot in the auxiliary dam. I want a
free hand in this, or--I can’t answer for the consequences. I warn you.”

The Governor lifted his eyebrows at the great engineer of the party. The
engineer looked at the Chairman of the Commission. He looked at the river.
Plainly, he disliked to give his word, which would carry much weight and which
might lead them astray. Peter walked steadily along, between the Governor and
Rawley, who held him solicitously by the arm.

“You will bear in mind that I have studied this problem all my life,” Peter
added urgently. “I’ve been spending a good deal of money on it. I have laid my
plans very carefully, so as to risk neither lives nor money. The people below
us will be safe, if you let me go ahead. In spite of the high water the Cramer
Dam will hold--if you let me go ahead and finish the job.”

The engineer shut his technical eyes and listened to his common reason. The
Governor was still glancing his way between steps, wanting his opinion.

“There’s a good deal in that,” the engineer said at last. “I should advise
that under the circumstances we permit Mr. Cramer to go ahead and make his dam
as safe as possible. It will not render the present danger any greater. The
longer the Cramer Dam holds, the better chance we will have of averting
disaster. Give me a little time, and I can, I think, promise to get the river
under control without any disastrous flood condition arising.”

Peter’s eyes darkened at the inference, but he had won at least one point.
That, he reflected, was more than might have happened. These were truly great
men; they were greater than their training of keeping well within the red-tape
fences.

“Very well, Mr. Cramer,” the Governor said. “I appoint you to take charge of
the safeguarding of the river against a flood. I cannot promise immediate
funds, however,--”

Peter dismissed that point with a gesture.

“I expected to finance the Cramer Dam from start to finish,” he said bluntly.
“I still expect to do that. All I ask is to be left alone.”

They had reached the flat rock, on the river bank opposite the shacks. Peter
sent a glance that way, saw that the shacks were standing, apparently
unharmed, and dismissed from his mind the thought of danger to his family.
With the engineer beside him, the Governor and others behind him, he kept
straight on to the dam site. He was wondering if that maniac, Old Jess, had
thought to remove the big launch to a safe point around the bend above. If
not, they might not be able to cross the river, should they want to do so.
There were a few ticklish little points in the situation, he was bound to
admit.

Rawley let go his arm and turned away toward the camp, and Peter called after
him.

“Have Gladys and Nevada cook a big breakfast, son. We’ll be back in an hour or
so. And look out for another blast. But it will be a lot farther off than this
one was. Have plenty of hot coffee.”

“You bet!” Rawley promised, his heart curiously light. Angry or pleased,
Nevada was very close. In another minute or two he would see her. There would
be plenty to talk about, besides themselves. Just to hear her voice, he
thought exultantly, would be a panacea for his loneliness.

As he neared the place he stopped as though some one had thrust him back. Then
he went on, running as he had not run from the small flood in the river. The
shacks stood, unharmed save for gaping window sashes, splinters of glass
sticking like flattened icicles to the edges. The porch of Nevada’s rock-faced
dugout cabin stood upright, though slightly twisted. But behind the porch the
rockwork was tumbled in a confused heap.

At a certain place in the ruins, Anita was whimpering and tearing at the rock
with her fingers. Two of the older children were trying to help. It was the
sight of these which filled Rawley with a cold fear. They would not tear at
the wreck of an empty cabin.

Anita turned and stared at him dully. Then she pointed, her hand shaking as if
she were stricken with palsy.

“In there--Nevada,” she quavered. “My girl die, mebby! Lil time ago, speak to
me. Now don’t speak no more. Mebby die.”

“Get back, out of the way.” Rawley went up, looked at the place where they had
been digging, and caught his breath.

“A little more, and you’d have had the whole thing in on top of her. Don’t you
see that wall just ready to topple? Kid, go get a pick and shovel. I’ll try
the roof.”

He recalled the construction of the place, thanking God that he had spent many
days there. The rock cabin had been set back into the hill, against a rock
ledge of the prevailing granite. That, he felt sure, would hold against
anything but a direct charge of explosives. In the far corner a dark,
closet-like recess had been cut, and roofed with poles, corrugated iron and
the dirt. It was used, he remembered, as a storeroom. It had never been
finished like the two rooms in front. The rock walls were bare, the poles and
iron showed in the low roof.

With pick and shovel he began digging at the roof, which had remained intact.
As he worked he cursed Peter’s thoroughness in constructing the place. The
poles were set rather close together, and they were spiked down to heavy
beams. The oldest boy brought a pinch-bar for that, and Rawley, throwing back
the iron roofing, pried up a pole and let himself down into blackness.

The heavy curtain that hung in the doorway of the storeroom was slit. Beyond,
the room seemed at his first dismayed glance to be completely filled with rock
and débris. Then, quite close, he saw her.

She was sitting before the homemade desk that held her typewriter. Spread out
before her were the books wherein she kept the records of the Cramer Dam. She
had been working on the books when the blast wrecked the place. A beam from
the ceiling had fallen, caught upon another beam, and pinned her down, bowed
over her desk. Perhaps she had been leaning upon her folded arms to rest, when
the shock came. But the beam was lying against her back, holding her down, and
upon that, around it, rocks were piled.

Rawley set his teeth, carefully removed the rocks between him and the girl,
and crept closer. Hesitating, afraid, he reached out and touched her fingers,
still closed around something which she had been holding in her hand. Her
fingers were cool, pliable,--alive, he could have sworn. So his heart, that
had seemed to stop altogether, gave a great jump.

Very gently he released the thing she was holding and drew it toward him. His
old, weather-scarred, briar pipe! He looked down at it dumbly, looked at
Nevada and very carefully laid the pipe back, against her fingers. His eyes
were very blue and bright; his face was very pale. He steadied himself. He
would get her out; he _must_ free her and bring her alive to the safe outside,
where--

A fear stabbed him. They were going to shoot in the other dam! He hadn’t much
time, then. Another shock,--Peter had told him to look out for a blast. It was
perhaps a matter of minutes.

He raised himself, looked at the beams. They seemed to be solidly braced, for
the present, though another concussion would be likely to throw them down. He
looked down.

Nevada was sitting on a reed stool, with two cushions upon it to give her
height. He crept closer, raised himself and set a shoulder against the beam
that lay along her bowed shoulders. He steadied it so while he took firm hold
of a cushion and pulled it from beneath her.

Nevada’s body sagged a bit. Rawley could see daylight now between her
shoulders and the beam. He waited a breath, felt no settling of the beam, and
pulled out the remaining cushion. Still the beam held fast. Nevada, then, was
not being crushed; she had been pinned down without bearing the weight of the
beam.

Rawley went back, crouching under the caved roof. His arms were round Nevada
when he stopped and picked up the pipe, slipping it into the pocket of her
blouse. Then, pulling her gently to him, he drew her out from under the beam
and into the granite-walled storehouse. As he lifted her in his arms Nevada
groaned.

Anita’s arms were uplifted to receive her when Rawley came up head and
shoulders through the gaping hole in the dugout roof. But he shook his head,
stepped out with her in his arms and dug heels in the soft bank, working his
way down to the level.

He still held the girl in his arms, looking for a place where he might lay her
comfortably, when the earth shook beneath his feet. The terrific boom of the
explosion deafened him. The jumble of rock shook and fell, tighter packed.

The auxiliary dam was in.




CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

THE EAGLE’S WING


Nevada was lying on the bed in Anita’s shack, trying to convince Rawley that
the doctor knew what he was talking about. The doctor had declared that
Nevada’s injuries were mostly superficial bruises and the nervous shock of
sitting cramped in one position for hours, expecting every moment to be
crushed to death. Nevada had seemed rather crestfallen when Rawley told her
how simple a matter it had been to free her from the beam.

“The whole thing caught me unawares just when I had stopped a minute to rest,”
she explained defensively. “I think I was half asleep when it happened, and of
course my lamp was smashed too flat even to think of exploding. It was black
dark, and I suppose it was natural to imagine that I was being crushed when I
was merely held fast. I did not try to move. I was afraid the whole thing
would come down on me. Of course, I should have thought of the cushions,--”

“You’d be a wonder if you had; even more of a wonder than you are.” Rawley
took her hand in both of his and patted it, in a sublime disregard of the
circumstances of his last visit to the basin. “I believe in omens, Nevada.
Fate gave me a splendid one when I found you.” Rawley smiled at her
mysteriously, his eyes twinkling.

“In the general wreck, my old pipe had landed from some cranny right on the
desk beside you. You can’t make me believe that Fate didn’t mean something by
that! The way I interpret it--”

“A freak accident,” interrupted Nevada, her cheeks showing alarming symptoms
of a sudden attack of fever. “That old pipe! You didn’t take it, and I must
have tucked it up somewhere until you came again. I suppose it rattled down.”

Rawley’s eyes had never been so blue. They were like looking down upon a
sunlit sea. He dipped his fingers into the pocket of Nevada’s blouse and
produced the pipe, turning it tenderly in his hands.

“God bless the day I learned to smoke!” he murmured, his eyes still dancing.
“It may have rattled down--but I know it’s a good omen. It means--”

“Yes?” Nevada’s big eyes were upon his face. A faint tremor was in her lips,
as if laughter and tears were fighting for the mastery.

“The omen says that you and I are going to get married within a week. Well
within a week.” He was studying the pipe as a mystic studies the crystal. “It
tells me that the hatchet is forever buried. This is the pipe of peace, and it
passed from me to you. That means that you and I go through life together. Our
trails never separate. It means--”

“Oh, hush!” Nevada cried sharply and struck at the pipe in his hand. “Our
trails can’t lie together. We can’t marry, ever--ever! You know that as well
as I do. We’re cousins.” She turned her face to the wall.

Rawley did not speak. He looked up from the pipe, straight into the eyes of
Anita, sitting in a corner like a bronze Buddha disguised as a squaw.

Anita met his look with stolid obstinacy, never blinking, never a quiver in
her face.

Rawley’s jaw squared a little as he continued to look at her. His body swayed
forward, his eyes boring into her very soul. So had King, of the Mounted,
looked when he demanded that Anita should choose between himself and Jess
Cramer. Rawley did not know why he stared at her so. He only knew that the
truth was there, hidden behind those unreadable eyes. He knew that the truth
would give him Nevada the moment that truth was spoken. No lips but Anita’s
might speak that truth; other lips were sworn to silence.

The old squaw whimpered under her breath. Her eyes flickered and could no
longer look defiance into those terrible, commanding blue eyes,--the eyes of
King, of the Mounted. Her hand went up to shield her face from the stare of
them. She stirred uneasily in her chair. She spread her fingers, peering
fearfully between them. The terrible blue eyes looked at her still. Slowly,
painfully, scarce knowing that she did so, Anita pulled herself up from the
chair and went forward as one goes to the bar of justice.

As a flame shoots up suddenly from dying embers, so did a flame dart out from
the ashes of her youth. The stooped, gross old body straightened. Anita’s head
went back. Her eyes glowed with a little of their old fire. Her voice rang
clear, proud with the pride of ancestry unknown.

“Nevada,” she cried imperiously and spoke rapidly in Indian. “It is not true
that you are his cousin. He is the grandson of a man I loved in my youth. He
is the grandson of Sergeant George King, who was the father of Peter. I have
been ashamed that you should know the truth. Now I am not ashamed, for I know
that stolen love is more noble than a lie. The father of Peter, him I loved.
He was a soldier and he went away. He promised to return in one month. In
three months he had not come, nor sent me word. I was angry and I let the man
he hated think that I loved him and not my soldier man. Then I went away, for
my heart was sad. I would not follow my soldier man. I was proud. After a long
time--after more than a year had passed I returned to El Dorado and I brought
my child, who was Peter. I sought for news of my soldier, but there was none.
He had not come, he had not sent me word. So I went to the man I hated. I told
him that Peter was his son, which was a lie. I was very proud. I thought that
some day my soldier would return and would see how I laughed at him and loved
another. But I did not love. And Peter was not the son of the man my soldier
hated. Now the young man comes and loves, and I am old. Soon I go to my
soldier man. It is not right that others should have sorrow because of my lie.

“So now I speak what is true. I say that this young man is not of your blood.
He is the grandson of the father of Peter, and Peter is his uncle. You are not
his cousin. Now you will be his wife, and you will hate Anita for the sin of
her youth.”

Nevada lay listening, gazing fixedly at her grandmother. She caught the
gnarled old hand of Anita in both her own. She fondled it, kissed it, laughed
softly with tears in her laughter.

“You will not hate Anita?” Tears spilled over the fat lids and trickled down
the cheeks of the old squaw.

Whatever Nevada said, she spoke in Indian, stealing a shy glance now and then
at Rawley. But her voice crooned caresses. Now and then she kissed the old
hand she held in both her own.

Anita tucked in her bangs, drew two fingers across her cheeks to dry her tears
and smiled. She turned heavily toward Rawley.

“My girl say, loves you more--I love your grandfadder. My girl make you good
wife.”

“Hush, Grandmother! He doesn’t want a fighting squaw--”

“Don’t, eh?” Rawley got up and made for her.

At that moment Peter walked in upon them, unconscious of the fact that he was
interrupting a very interesting conversation. Peter’s face was grave.

“Nevada, do you and mother know anything about Young Jess? Gladys is all upset
over him. She thought he was down in the river with his father. She heard them
talking about getting gold, and then the dam went, and she hasn’t seen him
since. If he’s hiding,” he added sternly, “he may as well come out and show
himself. I think it can be fixed up. The Governor wants to ask him some
questions.”

“How could I know? I was penned in when the cabin fell to pieces,” Nevada
countered. “They certainly said nothing to me, either one of them. I didn’t
see them all afternoon or evening.”

Anita slowly lifted her hand to her face and gropingly tucked in her bangs.
Her eyes were fixed dumbly on Peter’s face.

“Young Jess--by river,” she said reluctantly. “I walk in moonlight, no can
sleep. Comes big shootin’. I fall down. Bimeby I hear Nevada--she call me come
quick. I no see Jess no more. I come.” She recapitulated slowly. “Jess by
river, look on river. Comes shoot. No see Jess no more. Nevada call loud. Jess
no come.”

The eyes of the two men met significantly. Peter turned and went out, and
Rawley followed him.

“Concussion,” Rawley said succinctly. “If he were on the edge of the bank, it
would throw him off, very likely. It’s high, out here, and pretty steep. He
went into the river, in that case.”

“Yes--some folks upriver came near getting it when we shot in the second dam,”
Peter said tonelessly. “I sent a man up on a hill to wave back any stragglers,
but the doctor had to do some patching on the crowd, nevertheless. Well, I’ll
go and look along the river. He may be hurt, under the bank.”

Rawley did not think so, but he went with Peter and searched the bank
thoroughly. Halfway down, caught behind a bowlder, he found Young Jess’s hat.
He managed to retrieve it and bring it to Peter. Peter turned it over in his
hand, looked at Rawley and nodded.

“It’s his,” he said shortly. “It’s all we’ll ever find.”

He turned away toward the shack, swung back suddenly and faced the tremendous
heap of broken rock visible from midstream to the farther shore. He lifted
both hands high above his head, his face twisted, his eyes black with sublime
fury.

“Damn you!” he cried. “Curse the thought, born in greed, fostered in rapacity,
that put you there! Curse the bitter years that brought you to pass! For the
greed of the gold they would have filched, for the vulture’s eye that watched
and waited all these years, to swoop down and snatch and grab, with never a
thought for the rights of other men, I curse the thing I helped to make!

“Born in selfishness, you have defiled a mighty river that God meant should
flow through the land and one day be a blessing to mankind. You have made of
the river a monster. It is _you_ that is driving women and little children
from their homes! _You_, God damn you! You have been a traitor to the mind
that brought you forth. You have destroyed the two who worked and waited, that
you might pander to their greed. You have tried to destroy the dearest thing I
have on earth, because I saw in you something big and beautiful--because I was
fool enough to think that an idea spawned in devil-greed could live in noble
achievement.

“Look at the slimy thing the vultures have made of the river! The leprous
thing over which the vultures croaked--for a little while--croaked and went
down and died! The Eagle would never stop the river, leave it a naked,
stinking thing under the sky. For the good of mankind, the Eagle would have
tamed the river, without destroying it. The Eagle would have had it run
peacefully within its banks, helping without hurting. Now the river lies
shamed in its bed--that magnificent stream!--and men flee from it in terror.
The two who thought to feast in the slime--yes, and I, too, could stoop so low
as to root for gold like a hog in the mire!--you have swept them to
destruction, have cheated them at the last of their prey.

“But you have done your worst! I, who helped to make you what you are, who
created you thought by thought, I will tear you down. For the thing you are, a
monument to greed and self, I shall tear you down stone by stone until the
river is once more sweeping majestically down to the sea. As God is my
witness, this thing the vultures have created shall be forgotten. The Eagle’s
wing shall shadow the Colorado, a river undefiled.”

His voice ceased. He stood, hands clenched beside him, jaw squared, staring at
the dam that had been his dream. A dream fulfilled,--and hated in the
fulfillment. His lips moved, muttering the prophecy of Johnny Buffalo:

“‘You will succeed, and fail in the succeeding. And from the failure,--’”

A gloved hand was laid in friendly fashion on Peter’s shoulder. He turned and
looked into the eyes of his Governor.

“It takes a big man, a man of broad vision, to look upon his life’s work and
dare to say what you have said,” the Governor told him kindly, the look of
understanding in his eyes. “Don’t be down-hearted because your success has
proved a failure. The Cramer Dam would hold, I believe, if we wanted it to
hold. But you are right. It is not for the vulture, but for the Eagle to say
what shall be done with the river. The country needs more men like you, Peter.
You shall help to build another dam--and build it under the Eagle’s wing.”

Peter lifted his right hand and laid it upon the shoulder of his Governor. His
eyes were very blue and very deep. So they stood for a space and looked into
each other’s eyes.

“‘--And from the failure rise to greater things,’” Rawley repeated under his
breath, his eyes shining.


THE END

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

NOVELS BY B. M. BOWER


THE HERITAGE OF THE SIOUX

A Flying U story in which the Happy Family get mixed up in a robbery faked for
film purposes.

“Altogether a rattling story, that is better in conception and expression than
the conventional thriller on account of its touches of real humanity in
characterization.”--_The Philadelphia Public Ledger._


STARR, OF THE DESERT

A story of mystery, love and adventure, which has a Mexican revolt as its main
theme.

“The tale is well written.... A book worth the reading which it is sure to get
from every one who begins it.”--_The New York Tribune._


CABIN FEVER

How Bud Moore and his wife, Marie, fared through their attack of “cabin fever”
is the theme of this B. M. Bower story.

“It is breezy and wholesome, with a quiet humor.... Plenty of action is
evident, while the sentimental side of the story is thoroughly human and
altogether delightful.”--_The Boston Transcript._


SKYRIDER

A cowboy who becomes an aviator is the hero of this new story of Western ranch
life.

“An engrossing ranch story with a new note of interest woven into its breezy
texture.”--_The Philadelphia Public Ledger._


RIM O’ THE WORLD

An engrossing tale of a ranch-feud between “gun-fighters” in
Idaho.

“The author has filled the story with abundant happenings, and the reader of
this class of story will find many a thrill in its pages.”--_The Philadelphia
Public Ledger._


THE QUIRT

A story of ranch life in Idaho, with an abundance of action, adventure and
romance.

“Like all the Bower novels, ‘The Quirt’ rings true. Lovers of Western Stories
have long voted Bower a place in the front rank of those who tell of
ranch-life, bad men, range wars and rough riding.”--_The Boston Herald._


COW-COUNTRY

This story of Bud Birnie will appeal to all lovers of tales of the real West.

“A live, well-told Western romance which bears above all else the impress of
truth in its descriptions of both persons and country.”--_The New York Times._


CASEY RYAN

Lovers of stories of the real West will enjoy this humorous tale.

“This is one of the cleverest and most amusing of all the many books that have
come from B. M. Bower’s pen.... It is a rollicking story, full of mirth and
laughter from beginning to end.”--_The New York Times._


THE TRAIL OF THE WHITE MULE

Another Casey Ryan story in which Casey is funnier than ever.

“The author produces in Casey Ryan a fictional creation, a unique character
that is a worth while addition to our gallery of Western portraits in
fiction.”--_The New York Times._


THE VOICE AT JOHNNYWATER

“It is a crackerjack of a story, in B. M. Bower’s best style, the sort of
story that you have to read in one evening, so absorbing is it.”--_The St.
Louis Globe-Democrat._


LONESOME LAND

A vigorous tale of ranch life in Montana.

“Montana, described as it really is, is the ‘lonesome land’ of this delightful
Bower story. A prairie fire and the death of the worthless husband are
especially well handled.”--_A. L. A. Booklist._


THE RANCH AT THE WOLVERINE

A tale of Idaho ranch life, with a bewitching heroine.

“A ringing tale full of exhilarating cowboy atmosphere, abundantly and
absorbingly illustrating the outstanding features of that alluring ranch life
that is fast vanishing.”--_The Chicago Tribune._


THE FLYING U’S LAST STAND

What happened when a company of school teachers and farmers encamped on the
grounds of the Flying U Ranch.

“How the ranchmen saved their grazing grounds is told by the novelist with
breezy humor and an overflow of fanciful incident.”--_The Philadelphia North
American._


THE PAROWAN BONANZA

“The reader can always take up a story of B. M. Bower with the assurance that
it will seethe with action, humor, Western color and romance.... ‘The Parowan
Bonanza’ is a smooth-running, well-told tale that leaves the reader with a
comfortable sense of having seen the desert country at close range, of having
known its mysterious, starlit nights and burning days, and of having
participated for a time in all the surge and rush of a mining town in its
making and its débâcle.”--_The New York Times._


THE EAGLE’S WING

A project to dam the Colorado River furnishes the theme of this
characteristically picturesque and exciting Bower story.


Boston--LITTLE, BROWN & COMPANY--Publishers

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EAGLE'S WING ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
